@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8. Functions                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@newchapter{8,FUNCTIONS}
@menu
* 8.1:  INTRINSIC FUNCTIONS.
* 8.2:  BUILT-IN SYSTEM SUBROUTINES.
@end menu
@newsection{8.1,Intrinsic Functions}GnuCOBOL supports a wide variety of "intrinsic functions" that may be used anywhere in the PROCEDURE DIVISION where a literal is allowed.  For example:
@p @example
MOVE FUNCTION LENGTH(Employee-Last-Name) TO Employee-LN-Len
@end example
@* Note how the word @syntax{FUNCTION} is part of the syntax when you use an intrinsic function.  You can use intrinsic functions without having to include the reserved word @syntax{FUNCTION} via settings in the @syntaxref{REPOSITORY} paragraph.  You may accomplish the same thing by specifying the @switchidx{-fintrinsics} to the GnuCOBOL compiler when you compile your programs.
@p User-written functions (@pxref{Subprogram Types}) never require the @syntax{FUNCTION} keyword when they are executed, because each user-written function a program uses @i{must} be included in that program's @syntax{REPOSITORY} paragraph, which therefore makes the @syntax{FUNCTION} keyword optional.
@p The following intrinsic functions, known to other "dialects" of COBOL, are defined to GnuCOBOL as reserved words but are not otherwise implemented currently.  Any attempts to use these functions will result in a compile-time error message. However they are described at the end of this chapter.
@p @example
BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER
CHAR-NATIONAL
DISPLAY-OF
EXCEPTION-FILE-N
EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N
INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN
NATIONAL-OF
STANDARD-COMPARE
@end example
@* The supported intrinsic functions are listed in the following sections, along with their syntax and usage notes.
@menu
* 8.1.1:   ABS
* 8.1.2:   ACOS
* 8.1.3:   ANNUITY
* 8.1.4:   ASIN
* 8.1.5:   ATAN
* 8.1.6:   BYTE-LENGTH
* 8.1.7:   CHAR
* 8.1.8:   COMBINED-DATETIME
* 8.1.9:   CONCATENATE
* 8.1.10:  COS
* 8.1.11:  CURRENCY-SYMBOL
* 8.1.12:  CURRENT-DATE
* 8.1.13:  DATE-OF-INTEGER
* 8.1.14:  DATE-TO-YYYYMMDD
* 8.1.15:  DAY-OF-INTEGER
* 8.1.16:  DAY-TO-YYYYDDD
* 8.1.17:  E
* 8.1.18:  EXCEPTION-FILE
* 8.1.19:  EXCEPTION-LOCATION
* 8.1.20:  EXCEPTION-STATEMENT
* 8.1.21:  EXCEPTION-STATUS
* 8.1.22:  EXP
* 8.1.23:  EXP10
* 8.1.24:  FACTORIAL
* 8.1.25:  FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE
* 8.1.26:  FORMATTED-DATE
* 8.1.27:  FORMATTED-DATETIME
* 8.1.28:  FORMATTED-TIME
* 8.1.29:  FRACTION-PART
* 8.1.30:  HIGHEST-ALGEBRAIC
* 8.1.31:  INTEGER
* 8.1.32:  INTEGER-OF-DATE
* 8.1.33:  INTEGER-OF-DAY
* 8.1.34:  INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE
* 8.1.35:  INTEGER-PART
* 8.1.36:  LENGTH
* 8.1.37:  LENGTH-AN
* 8.1.38:  LOCALE-COMPARE
* 8.1.39:  LOCALE-DATE
* 8.1.40:  LOCALE-TIME
* 8.1.41:  LOCALE-TIME-FROM-SECONDS
* 8.1.42:  LOG
* 8.1.43:  LOG10
* 8.1.44:  LOWER-CASE
* 8.1.45:  LOWEST-ALGEBRAIC
* 8.1.46:  MAX
* 8.1.47:  MEAN
* 8.1.48:  MEDIAN
* 8.1.49:  MIDRANGE
* 8.1.50:  MIN
* 8.1.51:  MOD
* 8.1.52:  MODULE-CALLER-ID
* 8.1.53:  MODULE-DATE
* 8.1.54:  MODULE-FORMATTED-DATE
* 8.1.55:  MODULE-ID
* 8.1.56:  MODULE-PATH
* 8.1.57:  MODULE-SOURCE
* 8.1.58:  MODULE-TIME
* 8.1.59:  MONETARY-DECIMAL-POINT
* 8.1.60:  MONETARY-THOUSANDS-SEPARATOR
* 8.1.61:  NUMERIC-DECIMAL-POINT
* 8.1.62:  NUMERIC-THOUSANDS-SEPARATOR
* 8.1.63:  NUMVAL
* 8.1.64:  NUMVAL-C
* 8.1.65:  NUMVAL-F
* 8.1.66:  ORD
* 8.1.67:  ORD-MAX
* 8.1.68:  ORD-MIN
* 8.1.69:  PI
* 8.1.70:  PRESENT-VALUE
* 8.1.71:  RANDOM
* 8.1.72:  RANGE
* 8.1.73:  REM
* 8.1.74:  REVERSE
* 8.1.75:  SECONDS-FROM-FORMATTED-TIME
* 8.1.76:  SECONDS-PAST-MIDNIGHT
* 8.1.77:  SIGN
* 8.1.78:  SIN
* 8.1.79:  SQRT
* 8.1.80:  STANDARD-DEVIATION
* 8.1.81:  STORED-CHAR-LENGTH
* 8.1.82:  SUBSTITUTE
* 8.1.83:  SUBSTITUTE-CASE
* 8.1.84:  SUM
* 8.1.85:  TAN
* 8.1.86:  TEST-DATE-YYYYMMDD
* 8.1.87:  TEST-DAY-YYYYDDD
* 8.1.88:  TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME
* 8.1.89:  TEST-NUMVAL
* 8.1.90:  TEST-NUMVAL-C
* 8.1.91:  TEST-NUMVAL-F
* 8.1.92:  TRIM
* 8.1.93:  UPPER-CASE
* 8.1.94:  VARIANCE
* 8.1.95:  WHEN-COMPILED
* 8.1.96:  YEAR-TO-YYYY
* 8.1.97:  BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER
* 8.1.98:  CHAR-NATIONAL
* 8.1.99:  DISPLAY-OF
* 8.1.100: EXCEPTION-FILE-N
* 8.1.101: EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N
* 8.1.102: INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN
* 8.1.103: NATIONAL-OF
* 8.1.104: STANDARD-COMPARE
@end menu
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.1 ABS                                                       **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.1,ABS}
@diagram{ABS Function,FN-ABS,FN-ABS,None}@p This function determines and returns the absolute value of the @term{number} (a numeric literal or data item) supplied as an argument.
@* Note that ABSOLUTE-VALUE has an alias for this function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.2 ACOS                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.2,ACOS}
@diagram{ACOS Function,FN-ACOS,FN-ACOS,None}@p The @syntax{ACOS} function determines and returns the trigonometric arc-cosine, or inverse cosine, of the @term{cosine} value (a numeric literal or data item) supplied as an argument.
@p The result will be an angle, expressed in radians.  You may convert this to an angle measured in degrees, as follows:
@p @center @syntax{COMPUTE @term{degrees} = ( @term{radians} * 180 ) / FUNCTION PI}
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.3 ANNUITY                                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.3,ANNUITY}
@diagram{ANNUITY Function,FN-ANNUITY,FN-ANNUITY,None}@p This function returns a numeric value approximating the ratio of an annuity paid at the specified @term{interest-rate} (numeric data item or literal) for each of the specified @term{number-of-periods} (numeric data items or literals).
@p The @term{interest-rate} is the rate of interest paid at each payment.  If you only have an annual interest rate and you wish to compute monthly annuity payments, divide the annual interest rate by 12 and use that value for @term{interest-rate} on this function.
@p Multiply the result of this function times the desired principal amount to determine the amount of each period's payment.
@p A note for the financially challenged: an annuity is basically a reverse loan; an accountant would take the result of this function multiplied by -1 times the principal amount to compute a loan payment you are making.

@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.4 ASIN                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.4,ASIN}
@diagram{ASIN Function,FN-ASIN,FN-ASIN,None}@p The @syntax{ASIN} function determines and returns the trigonometric arc-sine, or inverse sine, of the @term{sine} value (a numeric literal or data item) supplied as an argument.
@p The result will be an angle, expressed in radians.  You may convert this to an angle measured in degrees, as follows:
@p @center @syntax{COMPUTE @term{degrees} = ( @term{radians} * 180 ) / FUNCTION PI}
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.5 ATAN                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.5,ATAN}
@diagram{ATAN Function,FN-ATAN,FN-ATAN,None}@p Use this function to determine and return the trigonometric arc-tangent, or inverse tangent, of the @term{tangent} value (a numeric literal or data item) supplied as an argument.
@p The result will be an angle, expressed in radians.  You may convert this to an angle measured in degrees, as follows:
@p @center @syntax{COMPUTE @term{degrees} = ( @term{radians} * 180 ) / FUNCTION PI}
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.6 BYTE-LENGTH                                               **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.6,BYTE-LENGTH}
@diagram{BYTE-LENGTH Function,FN-BYTE-LENGTH,FN-BYTE-LENGTH,None}@p @syntax{BYTE-LENGTH} returns the length --- in bytes --- of the specified @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal).  This intrinsic function is identical to the @syntaxref{LENGTH-AN} function.  Note that the value returned by this function is not necessarily the number of @i{characters} comprising @term{string}, but rather the number of actual @i{bytes} required to store it.
@p For example, if @term{string} is encoded using a double-byte character set such as UNICODE (where each character is represented by 16 bits of storage, not the 8-bits inherent to character sets like ASCII or EBCDIC), then calling this function with a @term{string} argument whose @syntaxref{PICTURE} is @syntax{X(4)} would return a value of 8 rather than the value 4.
@p Contrast this with the @syntaxref{LENGTH} function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.7 CHAR                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.7,CHAR}
@diagram{CHAR Function,FN-CHAR,FN-CHAR,None}@p This function returns the character in the ordinal position specified by the @term{integer} argument (a numeric integer literal or data item with a value of 1 or greater) from the @syntaxrefalt{COLLATING SEQUENCE,OBJECT-COMPUTER} being used by the program.
@p For example, if the program is using the (default) ASCII character set, CHAR(34) returns the 34th character in the ASCII character set --- an exclamation-point ("!").  If you are using this function to convert a numeric value to its corresponding ASCII character, you must use an argument value one greater than the numeric value.
@p If an argument whose value is less than 1 or greater than 256 is specified, the character in the program collating sequence corresponding to a value of all zero bits is returned.
@p The following code is an alternative approach when you just wish to convert a number to its ASCII equivalent:
@p @example
01  Char-Value.
    05 Numeric-Value        USAGE BINARY-CHAR.
@dots{}
    MOVE numeric-character-value TO Numeric-Value
@end example
@* The @syntax{Char-Value} item now has the corresponding ASCII character value.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.8 COMBINED-DATETIME                                         **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.8,COMBINED-DATETIME}
@diagram{COMBINED-DATETIME Function,FN-COMBINED-DATETIME,FN-COMBINED-DATETIME,None}@p This function returns a 12-digit numeric result, the first seven digits of which are the integer value of the @term{days} argument (a numeric data item or literal) and the last five of which are the integer value of the @term{seconds} argument (also a numeric data item or literal).
@p If a @term{days} value less than 1 or greater than 3067671 is specified, or if a @term{seconds} value less than 1 or greater than 86400 is specified, a value of 0 is returned and a runtime error will result.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.9 CONCATENATE                                               **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.9,CONCATENATE}
@diagram{CONCATENATE Function,FN-CONCATENATE,FN-CONCATENATE,None}@p This function concatenates the @term{string-1}, @term{string-2}, @dots{} (group items, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary items and/or alphanumeric literals) together into a single string result.
@p If a numeric literal or @syntax{PIC 9} identifier is specified as an argument, decimal points, if any, will be removed and negative signs in @syntax{PIC S9} fields or numeric literals will be inserted as defined by the @syntaxref{SIGN IS} clause (or absence thereof) of the field.  Numeric literals are processed as if @syntax{SIGN IS TRAILING SEPARATE} were in effect.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.10 COS                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.10,COS}
@diagram{COS Function,FN-COS,FN-COS,None}@p The @syntax{COS} function determines and returns the trigonometric cosine of the @term{angle} (a numeric literal or data item) supplied as an argument.
@p The @term{angle} is assumed to be a value expressed in radians.  If you need to determine the cosine of an angle measured in degrees, you first need to convert that angle to radians as follows:
@p @center @syntax{COMPUTE @term{radians} = ( @term{degrees} * FUNCTION PI) / 180}
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.11 CURRENCY-SYMBOL                                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.11,CURRENCY-SYMBOL}
@diagram{CURRENCY-SYMBOL Function,FN-CURRENCY-SYMBOL,FN-CURRENCY-SYMBOL,None}@p The @syntax{CURRENCY-SYMBOL} function returns the currency symbol character currently in effect for the locale under which your program is running.  On UNIX systems, your locale is established via the @envvarruntimeref{LANG} environment variable.  On Windows, the Control Panel's "Regional and Language Options" define the locale.
@p Changing the currency symbol via the @syntaxref{SPECIAL-NAMES} paragraph's @syntax{CURRENCY SYMBOL} setting will @i{not} affect the value returned by this function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.12 CURRENT-DATE                                             **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.12,CURRENT-DATE}
@diagram{CURRENT-DATE Function,FN-CURRENT-DATE,FN-CURRENT-DATE,None}@p Returns the current date and time as the following 21-character structure:
@p @example
01  CURRENT-DATE-AND-TIME.
    05 CDT-Year                PIC 9(4).
    05 CDT-Month               PIC 9(2). *> 01-12
    05 CDT-Day                 PIC 9(2). *> 01-31
    05 CDT-Hour                PIC 9(2). *> 00-23
    05 CDT-Minutes             PIC 9(2). *> 00-59
    05 CDT-Seconds             PIC 9(2). *> 00-59
    05 CDT-Hundredths-Of-Secs  PIC 9(2). *> 00-99
    05 CDT-GMT-Diff-Hours      PIC S9(2)
                               SIGN LEADING SEPARATE.
    05 CDT-GMT-Diff-Minutes    PIC 9(2). *> 00 or 30
@end example
@* Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.13 DATE-OF-INTEGER                                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.13,DATE-OF-INTEGER}
@diagram{DATE-OF-INTEGER Function,FN-DATE-OF-INTEGER,FN-DATE-OF-INTEGER,None}@p This function returns a numeric calendar date in yyyymmdd (i.e. Gregorian) format.  The date is determined by adding the number of days specified as @term{integer} (a numeric integer data item or literal) to the date December 31, 1600.  For example, @syntax{DATE-OF-INTEGER(1)} returns 16010101 while @syntax{DATE-OF-INTEGER(150000)} returns 20110908.
@p A value less than 1 or greater than 3067671 (9999/12/31) will return a result of 0.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.14 DATE-TO-YYYYMMDD                                         **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.14,DATE-TO-YYYYMMDD}
@diagram{DATE-TO-YYYYMMDD Function,FN-DATE-TO-YYYYMMDD,FN-DATE-TO-YYYYMMDD,None}@p You can use this function to convert the six-digit Gregorian date specified as @term{yymmdd} (a numeric integer data item or literal) to an eight-digit format (yyyymmdd).
@p The optional @term{yy-cutoff} (a numeric integer data item or literal) argument is the year cutoff used to delineate centuries; if the year component of the date meets or exceeds this cutoff value, the result will be 19yymmdd; if the year component of the date is less than the cutoff value, the result will be 20yymmdd.  The default cutoff value if no second argument is given will be 50.
@p The optional @term{yy-execution-time} argument (a numeric integer data item or literal)   The default execution time value if no third argument is given will be now equivalent to specifying (FUNCTION NUMVAL (FUNCTION CURRENT-DATE (1:4))).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.15 DAY-OF-INTEGER                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.15,DAY-OF-INTEGER}
@diagram{DAY-OF-INTEGER Function,FN-DAY-OF-INTEGER,FN-DAY-OF-INTEGER,None}@p This function returns a calendar date in yyyyddd (i.e. Julian) format.  The date is determined by adding the number of days specified as integer (a numeric integer data item or literal) to December 31, 1600.  For example, @syntax{DAY-OF-INTEGER(1)} returns 1601001 while @syntax{DAY-OF-INTEGER(250000)} returns 2011251.
@p A value less than 1 or greater than 3067671 (9999/12/31) will return a result of 0.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.16 DAY-TO-YYYYDDD                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.16,DAY-TO-YYYYDDD}
@diagram{DAY-TO-YYYYDDD Function,FN-DAY-TO-YYYYDDD,FN-DAY-TO-YYYYDDD,None}@p You can use this function to convert the five-digit Julian date specified as @term{yyddd} (a numeric integer data item or literal) to a seven-digit numeric Julian format (yyyyddd).
@p The optional @term{yy-cutoff} argument (a numeric integer data item or literal) is the year cutoff used to delineate centuries; if the year component of the date meets or exceeds this cutoff value, the result will be 19yyddd; if the year component of the date is less than the cutoff, the result will be 20yyddd.  The default cutoff value if no second argument is given will be 50.
@p The optional @term{yy-execution-time} argument (a numeric integer data item or literal)   The default execution time value if no third argument is given will be now equivalent to specifying (FUNCTION NUMVAL (FUNCTION CURRENT-DATE (1:4))).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.17 E                                                        **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.17,E}
@diagram{E Function,FN-E,FN-E,None}@p This function returns the mathematical constant "E" (the base of natural logarithms).  The maximum precision with which this value may be returned is 2.7182818284590452353602874713526625.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.18 EXCEPTION-FILE                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.18,EXCEPTION-FILE}
@diagram{EXCEPTION-FILE Function,FN-EXCEPTION-FILE,FN-EXCEPTION-FILE,None}@p This function returns I/O exception information from the most-recently executed input or output statement.  The information is returned as a 34-character string, where the first two characters are the two-digit file status value (@pxref{File Status Codes}) and the remaining 32 are the @term{file-name-1} specification from the file's @syntaxref{SELECT} statement.
@p The name returned after the file status information will be returned only if the returned file status value is not 00.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@p The documentation of the @subpgmref{CBL_ERROR_PROC} built-in subroutine illustrates the use of this function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.19 EXCEPTION-LOCATION                                       **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.19,EXCEPTION-LOCATION}
@diagram{EXCEPTION-LOCATION Function,FN-EXCEPTION-LOCATION,FN-EXCEPTION-LOCATION,None}@p This function returns exception information from the most-recently failing statement.  The information is returned to a 1023 character string in one of the following formats, depending on the nature of the failure:
@itemize @bullet
@p @item primary-entry-point-name; paragraph OF section; statement-number
@p @item primary-entry-point-name; section; statement-number
@p @item primary-entry-point-name; paragraph; statement-number
@p @item primary-entry-point-name; statement-number
@end itemize
@* Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@p The program must be compiled with the @switchidx{-debug}, @switchidx{-ftraceall} or @switchidx{-g} for this function to return any meaningful information.
@p The documentation of the @subpgmref{CBL_ERROR_PROC} built-in subroutine illustrates the use of this function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.20 EXCEPTION-STATEMENT                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.20,EXCEPTION-STATEMENT}
@diagram{EXCEPTION-STATEMENT Function,FN-EXCEPTION-STMT,FN-EXCEPTION-STMT,None}@p This function returns the most-recent COBOL statement that generated an exception condition.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@p The program must be compiled with the @switchidx{-debug}, @switchidx{-ftraceall} or @switchidx{-g} for this function to return any meaningful information.
@p The documentation of the @subpgmref{CBL_ERROR_PROC} built-in subroutine illustrates the use of this function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.21 EXCEPTION-STATUS                                         **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.21,EXCEPTION-STATUS}
@diagram{EXCEPTION-STATUS Function,FN-EXCEPTION-STATUS,FN-EXCEPTION-STATUS,None}@p This function returns the error type (a text string --- see column 2 of the upcoming table for the possible values) from the most-recent COBOL statement that generated an exception condition.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@p The documentation of the @subpgmref{CBL_ERROR_PROC} built-in subroutine illustrates the use of this function.
@p The following are the error type strings, and their corresponding exception codes and descriptions.
@anchoridx{Error Exception Codes}@anchoridx{Error Type Strings}
@multitable @columnfractions .075 .35 .575
@headitem Code @tab Error Type @tab Description
@p @item 0101 @tab EC-ARGUMENT-FUNCTION @tab Function argument error
@p @item 0202 @tab EC-BOUND-ODO @tab OCCURS @dots{} DEPENDING ON data item out of bounds
@p @item 0204 @tab EC-BOUND-PTR @tab Data-pointer contains an address that is out of bounds
@p @item 0205 @tab EC-BOUND-REF-MOD @tab Reference modifier out of bounds
@p @item 0207 @tab EC-BOUND-SUBSCRIPT @tab Subscript out of bounds
@p @item 0303 @tab EC-DATA-INCOMPATIBLE @tab Incompatible data exception
@p @item 0500 @tab EC-I-O @tab input-output exception
@p @item 0501 @tab EC-I-O-AT-END @tab I-O status "1x"
@p @item 0502 @tab EC-I-O-EOP @tab An end of page condition occurred
@p @item 0504 @tab EC-I-O-FILE-SHARING @tab I-O status "6x"
@p @item 0505 @tab EC-I-O-IMP @tab I-O status "9x"
@p @item 0506 @tab EC-I-O-INVALID-KEY @tab I-O status "2x"
@p @item 0508 @tab EC-I-O-LOGIC-ERROR @tab I-O status "4x"
@p @item 0509 @tab EC-I-O-PERMANENT-ERROR @tab I-O status "3x"
@p @item 050A @tab EC-I-O-RECORD-OPERATION @tab I-O status "5x"
@p @item 0601 @tab EC-IMP-ACCEPT @tab Implementation-defined accept condition
@p @item 0602 @tab EC-IMP-DISPLAY @tab Implementation-defined display condition
@p @item 0A00 @tab EC-OVERFLOW @tab Overflow condition
@p @item 0A02 @tab EC-OVERFLOW-STRING @tab STRING overflow condition
@p @item 0A03 @tab EC-OVERFLOW-UNSTRING @tab UNSTRING overflow condition
@p @item 0B05 @tab EC-PROGRAM-NOT-FOUND @tab Called program not found
@p @item 0D03 @tab EC-RANGE-INSPECT-SIZE @tab Size of replace item in inspect differs
@p @item 1000 @tab EC-SIZE @tab Size error exception
@p @item 1004 @tab EC-SIZE-OVERFLOW @tab Arithmetic overflow in calculation
@p @item 1005 @tab EC-SIZE-TRUNCATION @tab Significant digits truncated in store
@p @item 1007 @tab EC-SIZE-ZERO-DIVIDE @tab Division by zero
@p @item 1202 @tab EC-STORAGE-NOT-ALLOC @tab The data-pointer specified in a FREE statement does not identify currently allocated storage
@p @item 1203 @tab EC-STORAGE-NOT-AVAIL @tab The amount of storage requested by an ALLOCATE statement is not available
@end multitable
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.22 EXP                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.22,EXP}
@diagram{EXP Function,FN-EXP,FN-EXP,None}@p Computes and returns the value of the mathematical constant "e" raised to the power specified by @term{number} (a numeric literal or data item).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.23 EXP10                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.23,EXP10}
@diagram{EXP10 Function,FN-EXP10,FN-EXP10,None}@p Computes and returns the value of 10 raised to the power specified by @term{number} (a numeric literal or data item).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.24 FACTORIAL                                                **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.24,FACTORIAL}
@diagram{FACTORIAL Function,FN-FACTORIAL,FN-FACTORIAL,None}@p This function computes and returns the factorial value of @term{number} (a numeric literal or data item).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.25 FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.25,FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE}
@diagram{FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE Function,FN-FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE,FN-FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE,None}@p @syntax{FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE} Returns the current date and time provided by the system at run-time, formatted according to date-and-time-format according to the argument type.
@p The function argument must be a national or alphanumeric literal and the content, a combined date and time format.
@p The returned value is formatted to the same form as argument-1.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.26 FORMATTED-DATE                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.26,FORMATTED-DATE}
@diagram{FORMATTED-DATE Function,FN-FORMATTED-DATE,FN-FORMATTED-DATE,None}@p @syntax{FORMATTED-DATE} uses a format to convert a date in integer date form to a date in the requested format. The returned value will be in date format.
@p Argument-1 shall be a national or alphanumeric literal.
@p Argument-2 shall be a value in integer date form.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.27 FORMATTED-DATETIME                                       **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.27,FORMATTED-DATETIME}
@diagram{FORMATTED-DATETIME Function,FN-FORMATTED-DATETIME,FN-FORMATTED-DATETIME,None}@p @syntax{FORMATTED-DATETIME} uses a combined time and date form to convert and combine a date in integer form and a numeric time expressed as seconds past midnight in UTC.
@p Argument-1 shall be a national or alphanumeric literal.
@p Argument-2 shall be a value in integer date form.
@p Argument-3 shall be a value in standard numeric time form.
@p Argument-4 is an integer specifying the offset from UTC expressed in minutes. If specified but have a value equal or less than 1439.
@p    Note: The offset value 1439 represents 23 hours 59 minutes which is one minutes less than a day.
@p Augument-4 must not be specified if the time portion in argument-1 is neither a UTC nor an offset format.
@p The returned value is a representation of the date contained in argument-2 combined with the time contained in argument-3 according to the format in argument-1.
@p If the format in argument-1 indicates that the returned value is to be expressed in UTC, the time portion of the returned value reflects the adjustment of the value in argument-3 by the offset in argument-4.
@p If the format in argument-1 indicates that the time is to be returned as an offset from UTC, the value in argument-3 is reflected directly in the time portion of the returned value and the offset in argument-4 is reflected directly in the offset portion of the returned value.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.28 FORMATTED-TIME                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.28,FORMATTED-TIME}
@diagram{FORMATTED-TIME Function,FN-FORMATTED-TIME,FN-FORMATTED-TIME,None}@p @syntax{FORMATTED-TIME} converts a value representing seconds past midnight formatted time of day with optional offset.
@p Argument-1 shall be a national or alphanumeric literal.
@p Argument-2 shall be a value in integer time form.
@p Argument-3 is an integer specifying the offset from UTC expressed in minutes. If specified but have a value equal or less than 1439.
@p    Note: The offset value 1439 represents 23 hours 59 minutes which is one minutes less than a day.
@p Augument-3 must not be specified if the time portion in argument-1 is neither a UTC nor an offset format.
@p Returned value :
@p Is a representation of the standard numeric time contained in argument-2 according to the format in argument-1.
@p If the format in argument-1 indicates that the returned value is to be expressed in UTC, the time portion of the returned value reflects the adjustment of the value in argument-2 by the offset in argument-3.
@p If the format in argument-1 indicates that the time is to be returned as an offset from UTC, the value in argument-2 is reflected directly in the time portion of the returned value and the offset in argument-3 is reflected directly in the offset portion of the returned value.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.29 FRACTION-PART                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.29,FRACTION-PART}
@diagram{FRACTION-PART Function,FN-FRACTION-PART,FN-FRACTION-PART,None}@p This function returns that portion of @term{number} (a numeric data item or a numeric literal) that occurs to the right of the decimal point.  @syntax{FRACTION-PART(3.1415)}, for example, returns a value of 0.1415.  This function is equivalent to the expression:
@p @center @t{@term{number} -- FUNCTION INTEGER-PART(@term{number})}
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.30 HIGHEST-ALGEBRAIC                                        **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.30,HIGHEST-ALGEBRAIC}
@diagram{HIGHEST-ALGEBRAIC Function,FN-HIGHEST-ALGEBRAIC,FN-HIGHEST-ALGEBRAIC,None}@p This function returns the highest (i.e. largest or farthest away from 0 in a positive direction if @term{numeric-identifier} is signed) value that could possibly be stored in the specified @term{numeric-identifier}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.31 INTEGER                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.31,INTEGER}
@diagram{INTEGER Function,FN-INTEGER,FN-INTEGER,None}@p The @syntax{INTEGER} function returns the greatest integer value that is less than or equal to @term{number} (a numeric literal or data item).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.32 INTEGER-OF-DATE                                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.32,INTEGER-OF-DATE}
@diagram{INTEGER-OF-DATE Function,FN-INTEGER-OF-DATE,FN-INTEGER-OF-DATE,None}@p This function converts @term{date} (a numeric integer data item or literal) --- presumed to be a Gregorian calendar form standard date (YYYYMMDD) --- to internal date form (the number of days that have transpired since 1600/12/31).
@p Once in that form, mathematical operations may be performed against the internal date before it is transformed back into a date using the @syntaxref{DATE-OF-INTEGER} or @syntaxref{DAY-OF-INTEGER} function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.33 INTEGER-OF-DAY                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.33,INTEGER-OF-DAY}
@diagram{INTEGER-OF-DAY Function,FN-INTEGER-OF-DAY,FN-INTEGER-OF-DAY,None}@p This function converts @term{date} (a numeric integer data item or literal) --- presumed to be a Julian calendar form standard date (YYYYDDD) --- to internal date form (the number of days that have transpired since 1600/12/31).
@p Once in that form, mathematical operations may be performed against the internal date before it is transformed back into a date using the @syntaxref{DATE-OF-INTEGER} or @syntaxref{DAY-OF-INTEGER} function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.34 INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE                                **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.34,INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE}
@diagram{INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE Function,FN-INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE,FN-INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE,None}@p @syntax{INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE} converts a date that is in specified format to integer date form.
@p Argument-1 shall be a national or alphanumeric literal. The content must be either a date format or a combined date and time format.
@p Argument-2 shall be a data item of the same type as argument-1.
@p If argument-1 is a date format the content of argument-2 shall be a valid date in that format.
@p If argument-1 is a combined date and time format, the content of argument-2 shall be a valid combined date and time in same format.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.35 INTEGER-PART                                             **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.35,INTEGER-PART}
@diagram{INTEGER-PART Function,FN-INTEGER-PART,FN-INTEGER-PART,None}@p Returns the integer portion of the value of @term{number} (a numeric literal or data item).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.36 LENGTH                                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.36,LENGTH}
@diagram{LENGTH Function,FN-LENGTH,FN-LENGTH,None}@p Returns the length --- in characters --- of @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal).
@p The value returned by this function is not the number of @i{bytes} of storage occupied by string, but rather the number of actual @i{characters} making up the string.  For example, if @term{string} is encoded using a double-byte character set such as UNICODE (where each character is represented by 16 bits of storage, not the 8-bits inherent to character sets like ASCII or EBCDIC), then calling this function with a @term{string} argument whose @syntax{PICTURE is X(4)} would return a value of 4 rather than the value 8 (the actual number of bytes of storage occupied by that item).
@p Contrast this function with the @syntaxref{BYTE-LENGTH} and @syntaxref{LENGTH-AN} functions.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.37 LENGTH-AN                                                **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.37,LENGTH-AN}
@diagram{LENGTH-AN Function,FN-LENGTH-AN,FN-LENGTH-AN,None}@p This function returns the length --- in bytes of storage --- of @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal).
@p This intrinsic function is identical to the @syntaxref{BYTE-LENGTH} function.
@p Note that the value returned by this function is not the number of @i{characters} making up the @term{string}, but rather the number of actual @i{bytes} of storage required to store @term{string}.  For example, if @term{string} is encoded using a double-byte character set such as UNICODE (where each character is represented by 16 bits of storage, not the 8-bits inherent to character sets like ASCII or EBCDIC), then calling this function with a @term{string} argument whose @syntax{PICTURE is X(4)} would return a value of 8 rather than the value 4.
@p Contrast this with the @syntaxref{LENGTH} function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.38 LOCALE-COMPARE                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.38,LOCALE-COMPARE}
@diagram{LOCALE-COMPARE Function,FN-LOCALE-COMPARE,FN-LOCALE-COMPARE,None}@p The @syntax{LOCALE-COMPARE} function returns a character indicating the result of comparing @term{argument-1} and @term{argument-2} using a culturally-preferred ordering defined by a @term{locale}.
@p Either or both of the 1st two arguments may be an alphanumeric literal, a group item or an elementary item appropriate to storing alphabetic or alphanumeric data.  If the lengths of the two arguments are unequal, the shorter will be assumed to be padded to the right with spaces.
@p The two arguments will be compared, character by character, against each other until their relationship to each other can be determined.  The comparison is made according to the cultural rules in effect for the specified @term{locale} name or for the current locale if no @term{locale} argument is specified.  Once that relationship is determined, a one-character alphanumeric value will be returned as follows:
@itemize
@p @item "<" --- If @term{argument-1} is determined to be less than @term{argument-2}
@p @item "=" --- If the two arguments are equal to each other
@p @item ">" --- If @term{argument-1} is determined to be greater than @term{argument-2}
@end itemize
@p @xref{LOCALE Names}, for a list of typically-available locale names.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.39 LOCALE-DATE                                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.39,LOCALE-DATE}
@diagram{LOCALE-DATE Function,FN-LOCALE-DATE,FN-LOCALE-DATE,None}@p Converts the eight-digit Gregorian @term{date} (a numeric integer data item or literal) from yyyymmdd format to the format appropriate to the current locale.  On a Windows system, this will be the "short date" format as set using Control Panel.
@p You may include an optional second argument to specify the @term{locale} name (group item or @syntax{PIC X} identifier) you'd like to use for date formatting.  If used, this second argument @i{must} be an identifier.  Locale names are specified using UNIX-standard names.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.40 LOCALE-TIME                                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.40,LOCALE-TIME}
@diagram{LOCALE-TIME Function,FN-LOCALE-TIME,FN-LOCALE-TIME,None}@p Converts the four- (hhmm) or six-digit (hhmmss) @term{time} (a numeric integer data item or literal) to a format appropriate to the current locale.  On a Windows system, this will be the "time" format as set using Control Panel.
@p You may include an optional @term{locale} name (a group item or @syntax{PIC X} identifier) you'd like to use for time formatting.  If used, this second argument @i{must} be an identifier.  Locale names are specified using UNIX-standard names.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.41 LOCALE-TIME-FROM-SECONDS                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.41,LOCALE-TIME-FROM-SECONDS}
@diagram{LOCALE-TIME-FROM-SECONDS Function,FN-LOC-TM-FROM-SECS,FN-LOC-TM-FROM-SECS,None}@p Converts the number of @term{seconds} since midnight (a numeric integer data item or literal) to a format appropriate to the current locale.  On a Windows system, this will be the "time" format as set using Control Panel.
@p You may include an optional @term{locale} name (a group item or @syntax{PIC X} identifier) you'd like to use for time formatting.  If used, this second argument @i{must} be an identifier.  Locale names are specified using UNIX-standard names.
@p @xref{LOCALE Names}, for a list of typically-available locale names.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.42 LOG                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.42,LOG}
@diagram{LOG Function,FN-LOG,FN-LOG,None}@p Computes and returns the natural logarithm (base "e") of @term{number} (a numeric literal or data item).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.43 LOG10                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.43,LOG10}
@diagram{LOG10 Function,FN-LOG10,FN-LOG10,None}@p Computes and returns the base 10 logarithm of @term{number} (a numeric literal or data item).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.44 LOWER-CASE                                               **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.44,LOWER-CASE}
@diagram{LOWER-CASE Function,FN-LOWER-CASE,FN-LOWER-CASE,None}@p This function returns the value of @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal), converted entirely to lower case.
@p What constitutes a "letter" (or upper/lower case too, for that manner) may be influenced through the use of a @syntaxrefalt{CHARACTER CLASSIFICATION,OBJECT-COMPUTER}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.45 LOWEST-ALGEBRAIC                                         **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.45,LOWEST-ALGEBRAIC}
@diagram{LOWEST-ALGEBRAIC Function,FN-LOWEST-ALGEBRAIC,FN-LOWEST-ALGEBRAIC,None}@p This function returns the lowest (i.e. smallest or farthest away from 0 in a negative direction if @term{numeric-identifier} is signed) value that could possibly be stored in the specified @term{numeric-identifier}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.46 MAX                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.46,MAX}
@diagram{MAX Function,FN-MAX,FN-MAX,None}@p This function returns the maximum value from the specified list of numbers (each @term{number-n} may be a numeric data item or a numeric literal).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.47 MEAN                                                     **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.47,MEAN}
@diagram{MEAN Function,FN-MEAN,FN-MEAN,None}@p This function returns the statistical mean value of the specified list of numbers (each @term{number-n} may be a numeric data item or a numeric literal).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.48 MEDIAN                                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.48,MEDIAN}
@diagram{MEDIAN Function,FN-MEDIAN,FN-MEDIAN,None}@p This function returns the statistical median value of the specified list of numbers (each @term{number-n} may be a numeric data item or a numeric literal).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.49 MIDRANGE                                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.49,MIDRANGE}
@diagram{MIDRANGE Function,FN-MIDRANGE,FN-MIDRANGE,None}@p The @syntax{MIDRANGE} (middle range) function returns a numeric value that is the arithmetic mean (average) of the values of the minimum and maximum numbers from the supplied list.  Each @term{number-n} may be a numeric data items or a numeric literal.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.50 MIN                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.50,MIN}
@diagram{MIN Function,FN-MIN,FN-MIN,None}@p This function returns the minimum value from the specified list of numbers (each @term{number-n} may be a numeric data item or a numeric literal).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.51 MOD                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.51,MOD}
@diagram{MOD Function,FN-MOD,FN-MOD,None}@p This function returns the value of @term{value} modulo @term{modulus} (essentially the remainder from the division of @term{value} by @term{modulus}).  Both arguments may be numeric data items or numeric literals.  Either (or both) may have a non-integer value.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.52 MODULE-CALLER-ID                                         **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.52,MODULE-CALLER-ID}
@diagram{MODULE-CALLER-ID Function,FN-MODULE-CALLER-ID,FN-MODULE-CALLER-ID,None}@p This function returns the null string if it is executed within a main program.  When executed with a subprogram, it returns the entry-point name of the program that called the subprogram.
@p The discussion of the @syntaxref{MODULE-TIME} function includes a sample program that uses this function.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.53 MODULE-DATE                                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.53,MODULE-DATE}
@diagram{MODULE-DATE Function,FN-MODULE-DATE,FN-MODULE-DATE,None}@p This function Returns the date the GnuCOBOL program that is executing the function was compiled, in the form yyyymmdd.
@p The discussion of the @syntaxref{MODULE-TIME} function includes a sample program that uses this function.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.54 MODULE-FORMATTED-DATE                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.54,MODULE-FORMATTED-DATE}
@diagram{MODULE-FORMATTED-DATE Function,FN-MODULE-FMTD-DATE,FN-MODULE-FMTD-DATE,None}@p This function returns the fully-formatted date and time when the program executing the function was compiled.  The exact format of this returned string value may vary depending on the operating system and GnuCOBOL build type.
@p The discussion of the @syntaxref{MODULE-TIME} function includes a sample program that uses this function.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.55 MODULE-ID                                                **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.55,MODULE-ID}
@diagram{MODULE-ID Function,FN-MODULE-ID,FN-MODULE-ID,None}@p This function returns the primary entry-point name (i.e. the @syntax{PROGRAM-ID} or @syntax{FUNCTION-ID} of the program.  @xref{IDENTIFICATION DIVISION}, for information on those clauses.
@p The discussion of the @syntaxref{MODULE-TIME} function includes a sample program that uses this function.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.56 MODULE-PATH                                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.56,MODULE-PATH}
@diagram{MODULE-PATH Function,FN-MODULE-PATH,FN-MODULE-PATH,None}@p This function returns the full path to the executable version of this GnuCOBOL program.  The filename component of this value will be exactly as typed on the command line, down to the use of upper- and lower-case letters and presence (or absence) of any extension.
@p The discussion of the @syntaxref{MODULE-TIME} function includes a sample program that uses this function.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.57 MODULE-SOURCE                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.57,MODULE-SOURCE}
@diagram{MODULE-SOURCE Function,FN-MODULE-SOURCE,FN-MODULE-SOURCE,None}@p The filename of the source code of the program (as specified on the "cobc" command when the program was compiled) is returned by this function.
@p The discussion of the @syntaxref{MODULE-TIME} function includes a sample program that uses this function.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.58 MODULE-TIME                                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.58,MODULE-TIME}
@diagram{MODULE-TIME Function,FN-MODULE-TIME,FN-MODULE-TIME,None}@p This function returns the time the GnuCOBOL program was compiled, in the form hhmmss.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@p The following sample program uses all the MODULE- Functions:
@p @example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
PROGRAM-ID. DEMOMODULE.
ENVIRONMENT DIVISION.
CONFIGURATION SECTION.
REPOSITORY.
    FUNCTION ALL INTRINSIC.
PROCEDURE DIVISION.
000-Main.
    DISPLAY "MODULE-CALLER-ID      = [" MODULE-CALLER-ID "]"
    DISPLAY "MODULE-DATE           = [" MODULE-DATE "]"
    DISPLAY "MODULE-FORMATTED-DATE = [" MODULE-FORMATTED-DATE "]"
    DISPLAY "MODULE-ID             = [" MODULE-ID "]"
    DISPLAY "MODULE-PATH           = [" MODULE-PATH "]"
    DISPLAY "MODULE-SOURCE         = [" MODULE-SOURCE "]"
    DISPLAY "MODULE-TIME           = [" MODULE-TIME "]"
    STOP RUN
    .
@end example
@* The program produces this output when executed:
@p @example
MODULE-CALLER-ID = []
MODULE-DATE = [20180522]
MODULE-FORMATTED-DATE = [May 22 2018 12:43:14]
MODULE-ID = [DEMOMODULE]
MODULE-PATH = [/home/vince/cobolsrc/ACAS/demomodule]
MODULE-SOURCE = [demomodule.cbl]
MODULE-TIME = [124314]
@end example
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.59 MONETARY-DECIMAL-POINT                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.59,MONETARY-DECIMAL-POINT}
@diagram{MONETARY-DECIMAL-POINT Function,FN-MON-DECIMAL-POINT,FN-MON-DECIMAL-POINT,None}@p @syntax{MONETARY-DECIMAL-POINT} returns the character used to separate the integer portion from the fractional part of a monetary currency value according to the rules currently in effect for the locale under which your program is running.
@p On UNIX (including OSX, Windows/Cygwin and Windows/MinGW) systems, your locale is established via the @envvarruntimeref{LANG} environment variable.  On Windows, the Control Panel's Regional and Language Options define the locale.
@p Using the @syntaxrefalt{DECIMAL-POINT IS COMMA,SPECIAL-NAMES} clause in your program will not affect the value returned by this function.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.60 MONETARY-THOUSANDS-SEPARATOR                             **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.60,MONETARY-THOUSANDS-SEPARATOR}
@diagram{MONETARY-THOUSANDS-SEPARATOR Function,FN-MON-THOUSANDS-SEP,FN-MON-THOUSANDS-SEP,None}@p This function returns the character used to separate the thousands digit groupings of monetary currency values according to the rules currently in effect for the locale under which your program is running.
@p On UNIX (including OSX, Windows/Cygwin and Windows/MinGW) systems, your locale is established via the @envvarruntimeref{LANG} environment variable.  On Windows, the Control Panel's Regional and Language Options define the locale.
@p Using the @syntaxrefalt{DECIMAL-POINT IS COMMA,SPECIAL-NAMES} clause in your program will not affect the value returned by this function.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.61 NUMERIC-DECIMAL-POINT                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.61,NUMERIC-DECIMAL-POINT}
@diagram{NUMERIC-DECIMAL-POINT Function,FN-NUM-DECIMAL-POINT,FN-NUM-DECIMAL-POINT,None}@p This function returns the character used to separate the integer portion of a non-integer numeric item from the fractional part according to the rules currently in effect for the locale under which your program is running.
@p On UNIX (including OSX, Windows/Cygwin and Windows/MinGW) systems, your locale is established via the @envvarruntimeref{LANG} environment variable.  On Windows, the Control Panel's Regional and Language Options define the locale.
@p Using the @syntaxrefalt{DECIMAL-POINT IS COMMA,SPECIAL-NAMES} clause in your program will not affect the value returned by this function.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.62 NUMERIC-THOUSANDS-SEPARATOR                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.62,NUMERIC-THOUSANDS-SEPARATOR}
@diagram{NUMERIC-THOUSANDS-SEPARATOR Function,FN-NUM-THOUSANDS-SEP,FN-NUM-THOUSANDS-SEP,None}@p This function returns the character used to separate the thousands digit groupings of numeric values according to the rules currently in effect for the locale under which your program is running.
@p On UNIX (including OSX, Windows/Cygwin and Windows/MinGW) systems, your locale is established via the @envvarruntimeref{LANG} environment variable.  On Windows, the Control Panel's Regional and Language Options define the locale.
@p Using the @syntaxrefalt{DECIMAL-POINT IS COMMA,SPECIAL-NAMES} clause in your program will not affect the value returned by this function.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.63 NUMVAL                                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.63,NUMVAL}
@diagram{NUMVAL Function,FN-NUMVAL,FN-NUMVAL,None}@p The @syntax{NUMVAL} function converts a @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal) to its corresponding numeric value.
@p The @term{string} must have any of the following formats, where '#' represents a sequence of one or more decimal digits:
@p @center # @ @ -# @ @ +# @ @ #- @ @ #+ @ @ #CR @ @ #DB
@p @center #.# @ @ -#.# @ @ +#.# @ @ #.#- @ @ #.#+ @ @ #.#CR @ @ #.#DB
@p There must be at least one digit character in the string.
@p Leading and/or trailing spaces are allowed, as are spaces before the first digit.
@p The character period in argument-1 @term{string}, represents the decimal separator. The character comma in argument-1 represents the grouping separator. When the DECIMAL-POINT IS COMMA clause is specified, the character comma shall be used in argument-1 to represent the decimal separator and the character period shall be used to represent the grouping separator.
@p NOTE Locale-based functionality equivalent to NUMVAL can be obtained by using the NUMVAL-C function with the LOCALE keyword. A currency sign is optional in NUMVAL-C. The locale category LC_MONETARY will be used because there is no sign convention specified in locale category LC_NUMERIC.
@p Returned values:
@p The returned value is the numeric value represented by @term{string}.
@p If it contains a CR, DB, or the minus sign, the returned value is negative.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.64 NUMVAL-C                                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.64,NUMVAL-C}
@diagram{NUMVAL-C Function,FN-NUMVAL-C,FN-NUMVAL-C,None}@p This function converts a @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal) representing a currency value to its corresponding numeric value.
@p The currency string if any, and any grouping separators preceding the decimal separator are ignored. Optionally, the currency string, sign convention, grouping separator and the decimal separator permitted in the character string may be specified by locale category LC-MONETARY, or the currency string may be specified by @term{symbol}.
@p The optional @term{symbol} character represents the currency symbol (a non-space single-character group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal) that may be used as the currency character in @term{string}. Any spaces including leading or trailing are ignored. If no @term{symbol} is specified, the value that would be returned by the @intrinsicref{CURRENCY-SYMBOL} will be used.
@p If this references the LOCALE :
@p Changing the currency symbol via the "SPECIAL-NAMES" paragraph's "CURRENCY SYMBOL" setting will not affect the value returned by this function.
@p While NUMVAL-C will always use the currency symbol that is specified via the "SPECIAL-NAMES" paragraph's "CURRENCY SYMBOL (or the system default which is currently always '$').
@p @term{string} may have any of the following formats, where '#' represents a sequence of one or more decimal digits and '$' represents the @term{symbol} character:
@p @center # @ @ -# @ @ +# @ @ #- @ @ #+ @ @ #CR @ @ #DB
@p @center #.# @ @ -#.# @ @ +#.# @ @ #.#- @ @ #.#+ @ @ #.#CR @ @ #.#DB
@p @center $# @ @ -$# @ @ +$# @ @ $#- @ @ $#+ @ @ $#CR @ @ $#DB @ @ $#CR
@p @center $#.# @ @ -$#.# @ @ +$#.# @ @ $#.#- @ @ $#.#+ @ @ $#.#CR @ @ $#.#DB
@p There must be at least one digit character in the string.
@p Leading and/or trailing spaces are allowed, as are spaces before and/or after the currency symbol, sign, CR and DB characters.
@p If the ANYCASE keyword is used the matching rules for detecting a currency string in argument-1 are case-insensitive. If the ANYCASE keyword is not specified, the matching rules are case-sensitive.
@p If neither symbol nor the LOCALE keyword is specified, there shall be only one currency string used, either the default currency sign or a currency string specified in the SPECIAL-NAMES paragraph.
@p The returned value is the numeric value represented by string.
@p When the LOCALE keyword is specified, the returned value is negative if string contains a negative sign.
@p When the LOCALE keyword is not specified, the returning value is negative if string contains CR, DB, or a minus sign.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.64B NUMVAL-C                                                **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.64B,NUMVAL-C}
@diagram{NUMVAL-C Function,FN-NUMVAL-C-2,FN-NUMVAL-C-2,None}@p This function
returns the numeric value represented by the character string specified by argument-1 and defined as alphanumeric.
@p Argument-2, the currency string if any, and any grouping separators preceding the decimal separator are ignored. Optionally, the currency string, sign convention, grouping separator and the decimal separator permitted in the character string may be specified by locale category LC-MONETARY, or the currency string may be specified by argument-2.
@p The optional alphanumeric argument-2 character represents the currency symbol (a non-space and at least one single-character item, that may be used as the currency character in argument-1. Any spaces including leading or trailing are ignored. If no argument-2 is specified, the value that would be returned by the @intrinsicref{CURRENCY-SYMBOL} will be used. Argument-2 must not contain any of the digits - through 9, characters '*', '+', '-', ',' or '.'; or the two consecutive letters 'CR' or 'DB', whether upper or lower case or a combination of both.
@p Argument-2 specifies a currency string that may appear in argument-1.
@p If the ANYCASE keyword is specified, the matching rules for detecting a currency string in argument-1 are case-insensitive. If not specified, the matching rules are case-sensitive.
@p If neither argument-2 nor the LOCALE keyword is specified, there shall be only one currency string used, either the default currency sign or a currency string specified in the SPECIAL-NAMES paragraph.
@p While NUMVAL-C will always use the currency symbol that is specified via the "SPECIAL-NAMES" paragraph's "CURRENCY SYMBOL (or the system default which is currently always '$') argument-1 shall have any of the following formats, where '#' represents a sequence of one or more decimal digits and '$' represents the @term{symbol} character:
@p @center # @ @ -# @ @ +# @ @ #- @ @ #+ @ @ #CR @ @ #DB
@p @center #.# @ @ -#.# @ @ +#.# @ @ #.#- @ @ #.#+ @ @ #.#CR @ @ #.#DB
@p @center $# @ @ -$# @ @ +$# @ @ $#- @ @ $#+ @ @ $#CR @ @ $#DB @ @ $#CR
@p @center $#.# @ @ -$#.# @ @ +$#.# @ @ $#.#- @ @ $#.#+ @ @ $#.#CR @ @ $#.#DB
@p There must be at least one digit character in the string.
@p Leading and/or trailing spaces are allowed, as are spaces before and/or after the currency symbol, sign, CR and DB characters.
@p The returned value is the numeric value represented by argument-1.
@p When the LOCALE keyword is specified, the returned value is negative if string contains a negative sign and when not specified, the returning value is negative if string contains CR, DB, or a minus sign.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.65 NUMVAL-F                                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.65,NUMVAL-F}
@diagram{NUMVAL-F Function,FN-NUMVAL-F,FN-NUMVAL-F,None}@p This function converts a @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal) representing a floating-point value to its corresponding numeric value.
@p @center # @ @ -# @ @ +# @ @ #E# @ @ -#E# @ @ +#E#
@p @center #E+# @ @ -#E+# @ @ +#E+# @ @ #E-# @ @ -#E-# @ @ +#E-#
@p @center #.# @ @ -#.# @ @ +#.# @ @ #.#E# @ @ -#.#E# @ @ +#.#E#
@p @center #.#E+# @ @ -#.#E+# @ @ +#.#E+# @ @ #.#E-# @ @ -#.#E-# @ @ +#.#E-#
@p There must be at least one digit character both before and after the @syntax{E} in the string.
@p Leading and/or trailing spaces are allowed, as are spaces before and/or after any sign characters.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.66 ORD                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.66,ORD}
@diagram{ORD Function,FN-ORD,FN-ORD,None}@p This function returns the ordinal position in the program character set (usually ASCII) corresponding to the 1st character of the @term{char} argument (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal).
@p For example, assuming the program is using the standard ASCII collating sequence, @syntax{ORD('!')} returns 34 because "!" is the 34th ASCII character.  If you are using this function to convert an ASCII character to its numeric value, you must subtract one from the result.
@p The following code is an alternative approach when you just wish to convert an ASCII character to its numeric equivalent:
@p @example
01  Char-Value.
    05 Numeric-Value        USAGE BINARY-CHAR.
@dots{}
    MOVE "character" TO Char-Value
@end example
@p @syntax{Numeric-Value} now has the numeric value of @syntax{character}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.67 ORD-MAX                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.67,ORD-MAX}
@diagram{ORD-MAX Function,FN-ORD-MAX,FN-ORD-MAX,None}@p This function returns the ordinal position in the argument list corresponding to the @term{char-n} whose 1st character has the highest position in the program collating sequence (usually ASCII).
@p For example, assuming the program is using the standard ASCII collating sequence, @syntax{ORD-MAX('Z', 'z', '!')} returns 2 because the 2nd character in the argument list (the ASCII character 'z') occurs after 'Z' and '!' in the program collating sequence.  Each @term{char-n} argument may be a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.68 ORD-MIN                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.68,ORD-MIN}
@diagram{ORD-MIN Function,FN-ORD-MIN,FN-ORD-MIN,None}@p This function returns the ordinal position in the argument list corresponding to the @term{char-n} whose 1st character has the lowest position in the program collating sequence (usually ASCII).
@p For example, assuming the program is using the standard ASCII collating sequence, @syntax{ORD-MIN('Z', 'z', '!')} returns 3 because the 3rd character in the argument list (the ASCII character '!') occurs before 'Z' and 'z' in the program collating sequence.  Each @term{char-n} argument may be a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.69 PI                                                       **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.69,PI}
@diagram{PI Function,FN-PI,FN-PI,None}@p This function returns the mathematical constant "PI".  The maximum precision with which this value may be returned is 3.1415926535897932384626433832795029.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.70 PRESENT-VALUE                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.70,PRESENT-VALUE}
@diagram{PRESENT-VALUE Function,FN-PRESENT-VALUE,FN-PRESENT-VALUE,None}@p The @syntax{PRESENT-VALUE} function returns a value that approximates the present value of a series of future period-end amounts specified by the various @term{value-n} arguments at a discount rate specified by the @term{rate} argument.
@p All arguments are numeric data items and/or numeric literals.
@iftex
@p The following equation summarizes how present value is calculated, where 'N' is the number of @term{value} arguments:
@tex
$$ presentvalue = \sum_{i=1}^N
\left (value_i
\over (1+rate)^i\right) $$
@end tex
@end iftex
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.71 RANDOM                                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.71,RANDOM}
@diagram{RANDOM Function,FN-RANDOM,FN-RANDOM,None}@p This function returns a pseudo-random non-integer value in the range 0 to 1 (for example, 0.123456789).
@p The purpose of the optional @term{seed} argument, is to initialize the chain of pseudo-random numbers that will be returned by the function.  Not only will calls to this function using the same @term{seed} value return the same pseudo-random number, but so will all subsequent executions of the function without a @term{seed}.  This is actually a good thing when you are testing your program because you can rely on always receiving the same sequence of "random" numbers if you always start using the same @term{seed}.
@p The @term{seed} may be any form of literal or data item.  If @term{seed} is numeric, its numeric value will serve as the seed value.  If @term{seed} is alphanumeric, a value for it will be determined as if it were used as an argument to @syntaxref{NUMVAL}.
@p Take, for example, the following sample program:
@verbatim
    IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
    PROGRAM-ID. DEMORANDOM.
    DATA DIVISION.
    WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
    01  Pseudo-Random-Number        USAGE COMP-1.
    PROCEDURE DIVISION.
    000-Main.
        MOVE FUNCTION RANDOM(1) TO Pseudo-Random-Number
        DISPLAY Pseudo-Random-Number
        PERFORM 4 TIMES
            MOVE FUNCTION RANDOM    TO Pseudo-Random-Number
            DISPLAY Pseudo-Random-Number
        END-PERFORM
        STOP RUN
        .
@end verbatim
@* Every time this program is executed, it will produce the same output, because the same sequence of pseudo-random numbers will be generated:
@verbatim
    0.41
    0.18467
    0.63340002
    0.26499999
    0.19169
@end verbatim
@* It is worth mentioning that if the @i{first} execution of @syntax{RANDOM} in your program lacks a @term{seed} argument, the result will be exactly as if that execution were coded with a @term{seed} argument value of 1.
@p Once your program has been thoroughly tested, you'll want different sequences to be generated each time the program runs.  One possible way to accomplish this is to use a @term{seed} that is likely to be different every time the program is executed, as is likely to be the case if the first @syntax{MOVE} statement in the previous example were replaced by this:
@p @verbatim
    MOVE RANDOM(FUNCTION CURRENT-DATE(1:16))
      TO Pseudo-Random-Number
@end verbatim
@* The first 16 characters returned by the @syntaxref{CURRENT-DATE} function will be a number in the format "YYYYMMDDhhmmssnn", where "YYYYMMDD" is the current calendar date and "hhmmssnn" is the current time of day to the one one-hundredth of a second.  Since two different executions of the program will never get identical @syntax{CURRENT-DATE} values (unless they are executed in extremely close time frames to one another), using those first sixteen characters as the @syntax{RANDOM} seed will guarantee that receiving a duplicate sequence of pseudo-random numbers in two different executions of the program will be HIGHLY unlikely.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.72 RANGE                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.72,RANGE}
@diagram{RANGE Function,FN-RANGE,FN-RANGE,None}@p The @syntax{RANGE} function returns a value that is equal to the value of the maximum @term{number-n} in the argument list minus the value of the minimum @term{number-n} argument.
@p All @term{number-n} arguments are numeric data items and/or numeric literals.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.73 REM                                                     **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.73,REM}
@diagram{REM Function,FN-REM,FN-REM,None}@p This function returns a numeric value that is the remainder of @term{number} divided by @term{divisor}.  Both arguments must be numeric data items or numeric literals.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.74 REVERSE                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.74,REVERSE}
@diagram{REVERSE Function,FN-REVERSE,FN-REVERSE,None}@p This function returns the byte-by-byte reversed value of the specified @term{string} (a group item, USAGE DISPLAY elementary item or alphanumeric literal).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.75 SECONDS-FROM-FORMATTED-TIME                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.75,SECONDS-FROM-FORMATTED-TIME}
@diagram{SECONDS-FROM-FORMATTED-TIME Function,FN-SECS-FROM-FMTD-TM,FN-SECS-FROM-FMTD-TM,None}@p This function decodes the string @term{time} --- whose value represents a formatted time --- and returns the total number of seconds that string represents.
@p The @term{time} string must contain hours, minutes and seconds.  The time argument may be specified as a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or an alphanumeric literal.
@p The @term{format} argument is a string (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or an alphanumeric literal) documenting the format of @term{time} using "hh", "mm" and "ss" to denote where the respective time information can be found.  Any other characters found in @term{format} represent character positions that will be ignored.  For example, a format of @syntax{hhmmss} indicates that @term{time} will be treated as a six-digit string value where the first two characters are the number of hours, the next two represent minutes and the last two represent seconds.  A @term{format} of @syntax{hh:mm:ss}, however, describes @term{time} as an eight-character string where characters 3 and 6 will be ignored.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.76 SECONDS-PAST-MIDNIGHT                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.76,SECONDS-PAST-MIDNIGHT}
@diagram{SECONDS-PAST-MIDNIGHT Function,FN-SECS-PAST-MIDNIGHT,FN-SECS-PAST-MIDNIGHT,None}@p This function returns the current time of day expressed as the total number of elapsed seconds since midnight.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.77 SIGN                                                     **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.77,SIGN}
@diagram{SIGN Function,FN-SIGN,FN-SIGN,None}@p The @syntax{SIGN} function returns a -1 if the value of @term{number} (a numeric literal or numeric data item) is negative, a zero if the value of @term{number} is exactly zero and a 1 if the value of @term{number} if greater than 0.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.78 SIN                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.78,SIN}
@diagram{SIN Function,FN-SIN,FN-SIN,None}@p This function determines and returns the trigonometric sine of the specified @term{angle} (a numeric literal or numeric data item).
@p The @term{angle} is assumed to be a value expressed in radians.  If you need to determine the sine of an angle measured in degrees, you first need to convert that angle to radians as follows:
@p @center @syntax{COMPUTE @term{radians} = ( @term{degrees} * FUNCTION PI) / 180}
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.79 SQRT                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.79,SQRT}
@diagram{SQRT Function,FN-SQRT,FN-SQRT,None}@p The @syntax{SQRT} function returns a numeric value that approximates the square root of @term{number} (a numeric data item or numeric literal with a non-negative value).
@p The following two statements produce identical results:
@p @example
01  Result           PIC 9(4).9(10).
@dots{}
    MOVE FUNCTION SQRT(15) TO Result
    COMPUTE Result = 15 ^ 0.5
@end example
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.80 STANDARD-DEVIATION                                       **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.80,STANDARD-DEVIATION}
@diagram{STANDARD-DEVIATION Function,FN-STANDARD-DEVIATION,FN-STANDARD-DEVIATION,None}@p This function returns the statistical standard deviation of the list of @term{number-n} arguments (numeric data items or numeric literals).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.81 STORED-CHAR-LENGTH                                       **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.81,STORED-CHAR-LENGTH}
@diagram{STORED-CHAR-LENGTH Function,FN-STORED-CHAR-LENGTH,FN-STORED-CHAR-LENGTH,None}@p Returns the length --- in bytes --- of the specified @syntax{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal), minus the total number of trailing spaces, if any.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.82 SUBSTITUTE                                               **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.82,SUBSTITUTE}
@diagram{SUBSTITUTE Function,FN-SUBSTITUTE,FN-SUBSTITUTE,None}@p This function parses the specified @term{string}, replacing all occurrences of the @term{from-n} strings with the corresponding @term{to-n} strings.
@p The @term{from-n} strings must match sequences in @term{string} exactly with regard to value and case.
@p A @term{from-n} string does not have to be the same length as its corresponding @term{to-n} string.
@p All arguments are group items, @term{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary items or alphanumeric literals.
@p A null @term{to-n} string will be treated as a single space.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.83 SUBSTITUTE-CASE                                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.83,SUBSTITUTE-CASE}
@diagram{SUBSTITUTE-CASE Function,FN-SUBSTITUTE-CASE,FN-SUBSTITUTE-CASE,None}@p The @syntax{SUBSTITUTE-CASE} function operates the same as the @syntaxref{SUBSTITUTE} function, except that @term{from-n} string matching is performed without regard to case.
@p All arguments are group items, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary items or alphanumeric literals.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.84 SUM                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.84,SUM}
@diagram{SUM Function,FN-SUM,FN-SUM,None}@p The @syntax{SUM} function returns a value that is the sum of the @term{number-n} arguments (these may be numeric data items or numeric literals).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.85 TAN                                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.85,TAN}
@diagram{TAN Function,FN-TAN,FN-TAN,None}@p This function determines and returns the trigonometric tangent of the specified @term{angle} (a numeric literal or numeric data item).
@p The @term{angle} is assumed to be a value expressed in radians.  If you need to determine the tangent of an angle measured in degrees, you first need to convert that angle to radians as follows:
@p @center @syntax{COMPUTE @term{radians} = ( @term{degrees} * FUNCTION PI) / 180}
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.86 TEST-DATE-YYYYMMDD                                       **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.86,TEST-DATE-YYYYMMDD}
@diagram{TEST-DATE-YYYYMMDD Function,FN-TEST-DATE-YYYYMMDD,FN-TEST-DATE-YYYYMMDD,None}@p This function determines if the supplied @term{date} argument (a numeric integer data item or literal) is a valid date.
@p A valid date is one of the form yyyymmdd in the range 1601/01/01 to 9999/12/31, with no more than the expected maximum number of days in the month, accounting for leap year.
@p If the @term{date} is valid, a 0 value is returned.  If it isn't, a value of 1, 2 or 3 is returned signalling the problem lies with the year, month or day, respectively.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.87 TEST-DAY-YYYYDDD                                         **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.87,TEST-DAY-YYYYDDD}
@diagram{TEST-DAY-YYYYDDD Function,FN-TEST-DAY-YYYYDDD,FN-TEST-DAY-YYYYDDD,None}@p This function determines if the supplied @term{date} (a numeric integer data item or literal) is a valid date.
@p A valid date is one of the form yyyyddd in the range 1601001 to 9999365.  Leap year is accounted for in determining the maximum number of days in a year.
@p If the date is valid, a 0 value is returned.  If it isn't, a value of 1 or 2 is returned signalling the problem lies with the year or day, respectively.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.88 TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.88,TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME}
@diagram{TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME Function,FN-TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME,FN-TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME,None}@p @syntax{TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME} tests whether a date literal representing a date, a time or a combined date and time is valid according to the specified format.
@p Argument-1 shall be a national or alphanumeric literal. The content must be either a date format or a combined date and time format.
@p Argument-2 must be a data item of the same type as argument-1.
@p Returned value :
@p If no format or range problems occur during evaluation of argument-2 according to the format in argument-1, the returned value is zero. Otherwise the returned value is the ordinal character position at which the first error in argument-2 was detected.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.89 TEST-NUMVAL                                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.89,TEST-NUMVAL}
@diagram{TEST-NUMVAL Function,FN-TEST-NUMVAL,FN-TEST-NUMVAL,None}@p The @syntax{TEST-NUMVAL} function evaluates the specified @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal) for being appropriate for use as the @term{string} argument to a @syntaxref{NUMVAL} function, returning to a integer a zero value if it is appropriate otherwise if one or more characters are in error, the position of the first character in error or the length of the field plus one for other cases such as all spaces.
@p Note that these errors include but are not limited to: argument (string) is zero length, contains only spaces or contains valid characters but is incomplete, such as the string "+.".
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.90 TEST-NUMVAL-C                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.90,TEST-NUMVAL-C}
@diagram{TEST-NUMVAL-C Function,FN-TEST-NUMVAL-C,FN-TEST-NUMVAL-C,None}@p This function evaluates the specified @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal) for being appropriate for use as the @term{string} argument to a @syntaxref{NUMVAL-C} function, returning to a integer a zero value if it is appropriate otherwise if one or more characters are in error, the position of the first character in error or the length of the field plus one for other cases such as all spaces.
@p Note that these errors include but are not limited to: argument (string) is zero length, contains only spaces or contains valid characters but is incomplete, such as the string "+.".
@p The optional @term{symbol} argument serves the same function --- and has the same default and possible values --- as the corresponding argument of the @syntax{NUMVAL-C} function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.91 TEST-NUMVAL-F                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.91,TEST-NUMVAL-F}
@diagram{TEST-NUMVAL-F Function,FN-TEST-NUMVAL-F,FN-TEST-NUMVAL-F,None}@p This function evaluates the specified @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal) for being appropriate for use as the @term{string} argument to a @syntaxref{NUMVAL-F} function, returning to a integer a zero value if it is appropriate otherwise if one or more characters are in error, the position of the first character in error or the length of the field plus one for other cases such as all spaces.
@p Note that these errors include but are not limited to: argument (string) is zero length, contains only spaces or contains valid characters but is incomplete, such as the string "+.".
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.92 TRIM                                                     **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.92,TRIM}
@diagram{TRIM Function,FN-TRIM,FN-TRIM,None}@p This function removes @syntaxidx{LEADING} or @syntaxidx{TRAILING} spaces from the specified @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal).
@p The second argument is specified as a keyword, not a quoted string or identifier.  If no second argument is specified, @i{both} leading and trailing spaces will be removed.  The case (upper, lower or mixed) of this argument is irrelevant.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.93 UPPER-CASE                                               **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.93,UPPER-CASE}
@diagram{UPPER-CASE Function,FN-UPPER-CASE,FN-UPPER-CASE,None}@p This function returns the value of @term{string} (a group item, @syntax{USAGE DISPLAY} elementary item or alphanumeric literal), converted entirely to upper case.
@p What constitutes a "letter" (or upper/lower case too, for that manner) may be influenced through the use of a @syntaxrefalt{CHARACTER CLASSIFICATION,OBJECT-COMPUTER}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.94 VARIANCE                                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.94,VARIANCE}
@diagram{VARIANCE Function,FN-VARIANCE,FN-VARIANCE,None}@p This function returns the statistical variance of the specified list of @term{number-n} arguments (these may be numeric data items or numeric literals).
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.95 WHEN-COMPILED                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.95,WHEN-COMPILED}
@diagram{WHEN-COMPILED Function,FN-WHEN-COMPILED,FN-WHEN-COMPILED,None}@p The @syntax{WHEN-COMPILED} intrinsic function, not to be confused with the @syntaxrefalt{WHEN-COMPILED,Special Registers} special register, returns the date and time the program was compiled, in ASCII.
@p Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@p Unlike the @syntax{WHEN-COMPILED} special register, which has an ASCII value of the compilation date/time in the format "mm/dd/yyhh.mm.ss", the @syntax{WHEN-COMPILED} intrinsic function returns the compilation date/time as an ASCII string in the format "yyyymmddhhmmssnnooooo", where "yyyymmdd" is the date, "hhmmss" is the time, "nn" is the hundredths of a second component of the compilation time, if available (or "00" if it isn't) and "ooooo" is the time zone offset from GMT.
@p If the @switch{-fintrinsics=WHEN-COMPILED} or @switch{-fintrinsics=ALL} is specified to the compiler or the @syntaxref{REPOSITORY} paragraph specifies either @syntax{FUNCTION WHEN-COMPILED INTRINSIC} or @syntax{FUNCTION ALL INTRINSIC}, then references to @syntax{WHEN-COMPILED} (without a leading @syntax{FUNCTION} keyword will always reference this intrinsic function and there will be no way to access the @syntax{WHEN-COMPILED} special register.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.96 YEAR-TO-YYYY                                             **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.96,YEAR-TO-YYYY}
@diagram{YEAR-TO-YYYY Function,FN-YEAR-TO-YYYY,FN-YEAR-TO-YYYY,None}@p @syntax{YEAR-TO-YYYY} converts @term{yy} --- a two-digit year --- to a four-digit format (yyyy).
@p The optional @term{yy-cutoff} argument is the year cutoff used to delineate centuries; if @term{yy} meets or exceeds this cutoff value, the result will be 19yy; if @term{yy} is less than the cutoff, the result will be 20yy.  The default cutoff value if no second argument is given will be 50.
@p The optional @term{yy-execution-time} argument (a numeric integer data item or literal)   The default execution time value if no third argument is given will be now equivalent to specifying (FUNCTION NUMVAL (FUNCTION CURRENT-DATE (1:4))).
@p All arguments must be numeric data items or numeric literals.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.97 BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER                                       **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.97,BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER}
@diagram{BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER Function,FN-BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER,FN-BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER,NOT-YET-IMPLEMENTED}@p @syntax{BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER} returns a boolean item of usage bit representing the binary value of argument-1. Argument-2 specifies the length of the boolean data item that is returned.
@p Argument-1 must be a positive integer.
@p Argument-2 must be a positive non-zero integer
@p Returned value is a boolean item of usage bit that has the same bit configuration as the binary representation of the value of argument-1, where the rightmost boolean position is the low-order binary digit. The boolean value is zero-filled or truncated on the left, if necessary, in order to return a boolean item whose length is specified by argument-2 in therms of boolean positions.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.98 CHAR-NATIONAL                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.98,CHAR-NATIONAL}
@diagram{CHAR-NATIONAL Function,FN-CHAR-NATIONAL,FN-CHAR-NATIONAL,NOT-YET-IMPLEMENTED}@p @syntax{CHAR-NATIONAL} returns a one character value that is a character in the national program collating sequence having the ordinal position equal to the value of the argument.
@p Argument-1 must be a integer and greater than zero and less than or equal to the number of positions in the national program collating sequence.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.99 DISPLAY-OF                                               **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.99,DISPLAY-OF}
@diagram{DISPLAY-OF Function,FN-DISPLAY-OF,FN-DISPLAY-OF,NOT-YET-IMPLEMENTED}@p @syntax{DISPLAY-OF} returns a character string containing the alphabetic coded character set representation of the national characters in the argument.
@p Argument-1 must be of class national.
@p Argument-2 must be a of class alphabetic or alphanumeric and is one character position in length. It specifies an alphanumeric substitution character for use in conversion of national characters for which there is no corresponding alphanumeric character.
@p A character string is returned with each national character of argument-1 converted to its corresponding alphanumeric character representation, if any.
@p If argument-2 is specified, the alphanumeric substitution character is returned for each national character in argument-1 that has no corresponding alphanumeric character representation.
@p If argument-2 is un-specified, and argument-1 contains a national character for which there is no corresponding alphanumeric character representation, an substitution character is used as the corresponding alphanumeric character and the EC-DATA-CONVERSION exception condition is set.
@p The length of the returned value is the number of character positions of usage display required to hold the converted argument and depends on the number of characters contained in argument-1.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.100 EXCEPTION-FILE-N                                        **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.100,EXCEPTION-FILE-N}
@diagram{EXCEPTION-FILE-N Function,FN-EXCEPTION-FILE-N,FN-EXCEPTION-FILE-N,NOT-YET-IMPLEMENTED}@p @syntax{EXCEPTION-FILE-N} returns a national character string that is the I/O status value and file-name of the file connector, if any, associated with the last exception status.
@p The value returned has a length that is based on its contents and the concents are as follows:
@p If the last exception status is not an EC-I-O eception condition, the returned value is two national zeros.
@p The returned value is two national spaces when the last exception status indicates an EC-I-O exception condition that originates from one of the following statements:
@p -- a RAISE statement.
@p -- an EXIT or a GOBACK statement with a RAISING phrase that specifies an EC-I-O exception-name.
@p Otherwise the returned value is a character string that is as long as is needed to contain the I-O status value and the file-name. The first two characters are the I-O status value in national characters. The succeeding characters contain the file-name exactly as specified in the SELECT clause converted at runtime to the runtime national character set.
@p The documentation of the @subpgmref{CBL_ERROR_PROC} built-in subroutine illustrates the use of this function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.101 EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.101,EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N}
@diagram{EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N Function,FN-EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N,FN-EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N,NOT-YET-IMPLEMENTED}@p @syntax{EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N} returns an national character string containing exception information from the most-recently failing statement.  The information is returned to a 1023 character string in one of the following formats, depending on the nature of the failure:
@itemize @bullet
@p @item primary-entry-point-name; paragraph OF section; statement-number
@p @item primary-entry-point-name; section; statement-number
@p @item primary-entry-point-name; paragraph; statement-number
@p @item primary-entry-point-name; statement-number
@end itemize
@* Since this function has no arguments, no parenthesis should be specified.
@p The program must be compiled with the @switchidx{-debug}, @switchidx{-ftraceall} or @switchidx{-g} for this function to return any meaningful information.
@p The documentation of the @subpgmref{CBL_ERROR_PROC} built-in subroutine illustrates the use of this function.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.102 INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.102,INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN}
@diagram{INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN Function,FN-INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN,FN-INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN,NOT-YET-IMPLEMENTED}@p @syntax{INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN} returns the numeric value of the boolean string in argument-1 which is class boolean.
@p Returned value as argument-1 is assigned to a temporary boolean data item of usage bit described with the same number
of boolean positions.
@p The unsigned binary value represented by the same bit configuration as the bit configuration of that
temporary boolean data item is determined.
@* NOTE Binary representation is a mathematical concept. It is not required that this representation be the same as a
COBOL representation.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.103 NATIONAL-OF                                             **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.103,NATIONAL-OF}
@diagram{NATIONAL-OF Function,FN-NATIONAL-OF,FN-NATIONAL-OF,NOT-YET-IMPLEMENTED}@p @syntax{NATIONAL-OF} returns a character string containing the national character representation of the characters in the argument which must be of class boolean.
@p A character string is returned with each alphanumeric character in argument-1 converted to its corresponding national coded character set representation.
@p If argument-2 is specified, each character in argument-1 that has no corresponding national representation is converted to the substitution character specified by argument-2.
@p If argument-2 is unspecified and argument-1 contains an alphanumeric character for which there is no corresponding national character representation, a substitution character is used as the corresponding national character and the EC-DATA-CONVERSION exception condition is set to exist.
@p The length of the returned value is the number of character positions of usage national required to hold the converted argument and depends on the number of characters contained in argument-1.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.1.104 STANDARD-COMPARE                                        **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.1.104,STANDARD-COMPARE}
@diagram{STANDARD-COMPARE Function,FN-STANDARD-COMPARE,FN-STANDARD-COMPARE,NOT-YET-IMPLEMENTED}@p @syntax{STANDARD-COMPARE}  returns a character indicating the result of comparing argument-1 as a alphanumeric and argument-2 using a cultural ordering table.
@p 1) Argument-1 shall be of class alphabetic, alphanumeric, or national.
@p 2) Argument-2 shall be of class alphabetic, alphanumeric, or national.
@p 3) Argument-1 and argument-2 may be of different classes.
@p 4) Neither argument-1 nor argument-2 shall be a zero-length literal.
@p 5) Ordering-name-1, if specified, shall be associated with a cultural ordering table in the ORDER TABLE clause of the SPEClAL-NAMES paragraph. Ordering-name-I identifies the ordering table to be used for the comparison. if ordering-name-1 is not specified, the default ordering table 'ISO14651_2010_TABLE1 described in Appendix A of ISO/IEC 14651:2011 shall be used.
@p 6) Argument-4, if specified, shall be a positive nonzero integer.
@p Returned values:
@p 1) If argument-4 is unspecified, the highest level defined in the ordering table is used for the comparison.
@p 2) If the cultural ordering table is not available on the processor, or the specified ordering level is not available, or the level number specified by argument-4 is not defined in the ordering table, the EC-ORDER-NOT-SUPPORTED exception condition is set.
@p 3) If the arguments are of different classes, and one is national, the other argument is converted to class national for purposes of comparison.
@p 4) For purposes of comparison, trailing spaces are truncated from the operands except that an operand consisting of all spaces is truncated to a single space.
@p 5) Argument-1 and argument-2 are compared in accordance with the ordering table and ordering level being used.
@*NOTE This comparison is culturally sensitive and the default ordering table is acceptable for most cultures. It is not
necessarily a character-by-character comparison and not necessarily a case-sensitive comparison. In order to use this
function, users should understand the types of comparisons specified by ISO/IEC 14651:2D11 and the ordering tables in
use for their installation.
@p 6) The returned value is:
@p      "=" if the arguments compare equal,
@p      "-=.:" if argument-1 is less than argument-2,
@p      ":>" if argument-1 is greater than argument-2.
@p 7) The length of the returned value is 1.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2 Built-In System Subroutines                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsection{8.2,Built-In System Subroutines}@p There are a number of built-in system subroutines included with GnuCOBOL.
@p Generally, these routines are intended to match those available in Micro Focus COBOL, ACUCOBOL and directly for GnuCOBOL.
@p It is recommended to change the CBL_OC routines to CBL_GC for forward compatibility as at some point they will be removed as they are a hangover from Open Cobol.
@verbatim

Prefix explanation:
        C$ --> ACU,
        CBL_ --> MF,
        CBL_GC_ (For backwards compatibility some routines are also available as
        CBL_OC_, as well): but these wonderful extensions are *only* available
        with GnuCOBOL.

@end verbatim

@p These routines, all executed via their UPPER-CASE NAMES via the @statementref{CALL}, are capable of performing the following Functions:
@itemize @bullet
@p @item Changing the current directory
@p @item Copying files
@p @item Creating a directory
@p @item Creating, Opening, Closing, Reading and Writing byte-stream files
@p @item Deleting directories (folders)
@p @item Deleting files
@p @item Determining how many arguments were passed to a subroutine
@p @item Getting file information (size and last-modification date/time)
@p @item Getting the length (in bytes) of an argument passed to a subroutine
@p @item Justifying a field left-, right- or center-aligned
@p @item Moving files (a destructive "copy")
@p @item Putting the program 'to sleep', specifying the sleep time in seconds
@p @item Putting the program 'to sleep', specifying the sleep time in nanoseconds; CAVEAT: although you'll express the time in nanoseconds, Windows systems will only be able to sleep at a millisecond granularity
@p @item Retrieving information about the currently-executing program
@p @item Submitting a command to the shell environment appropriate for the version of GnuCOBOL you are using for execution
@end itemize
@* Early versions of Micro Focus COBOL allowed programmers to access various runtime library routines by using a single two-digit hexadecimal number as the entry-point name.  These were known as call-by-number routines.  Over time, Micro Focus COBOL evolved, replacing most of the call-by-number routines with ones accessible using a more conventional call-by-name technique.
@p Most of the call-by-number routines have evolved into even more powerful call-by-name routines, many of which are supported by GnuCOBOL.
@p Some of the original call-by-number routines never evolved call-by-name equivalents; GnuCOBOL supports some of these routines.
@p The following sections describe the various built-in subroutines.  ALL SUBROUTINE ARGUMENTS ARE MANDATORY EXCEPT WHERE EXPLICITLY NOTED TO THE CONTRARY.  Any subroutine returning a value to the @registerref{RETURN-CODE} could utilize the @syntax{RETURNING} clause on the @statement{CALL} to return the result back to the full-word binary data item of your choice.
@menu
* 8.2.1:  C$CALLEDBY.
* 8.2.2:  C$CHDIR.
* 8.2.3:  C$COPY.
* 8.2.4:  C$DELETE.
* 8.2.5:  C$FILEINFO.
* 8.2.6:  C$GETPID.
* 8.2.7:  C$JUSTIFY.
* 8.2.8:  C$MAKEDIR.
* 8.2.9:  C$NARG.
* 8.2.10: C$PARAMSIZE.
* 8.2.11: C$PRINTABLE.
* 8.2.12: C$SLEEP.
* 8.2.13: C$TOLOWER.
* 8.2.14: C$TOUPPER.
* 8.2.15: CBL_AND.
* 8.2.16: CBL_CHANGE_DIR.
* 8.2.17: CBL_CHECK_FILE_EXIST.
* 8.2.18: CBL_CLOSE_FILE.
* 8.2.19: CBL_COPY_FILE.
* 8.2.20: CBL_CREATE_DIR.
* 8.2.21: CBL_CREATE_FILE.
* 8.2.22: CBL_DELETE_DIR.
* 8.2.23: CBL_DELETE_FILE.
* 8.2.24: CBL_EQ.
* 8.2.25: CBL_ERROR_PROC.
* 8.2.26: CBL_EXIT_PROC.
* 8.2.27: CBL_FLUSH_FILE.
* 8.2.28: CBL_GC_FORK.
* 8.2.29: CBL_GC_GETOPT.
* 8.2.30: CBL_GC_HOSTED.
* 8.2.31: CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP.
* 8.2.32: CBL_GC_PRINTABLE.
* 8.2.33: CBL_GC_WAITPID.
* 8.2.34: CBL_GET_CSR_POS.
* 8.2.35: CBL_GET_CURRENT_DIR.
* 8.2.36: CBL_GET_SCR_SIZE.
* 8.2.37: CBL_IMP.
* 8.2.38: CBL_NIMP.
* 8.2.39: CBL_NOR.
* 8.2.40: CBL_NOT.
* 8.2.42: CBL_OPEN_FILE.
* 8.2.43: CBL_OR.
* 8.2.44: CBL_READ_FILE.
* 8.2.45: CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR.
* 8.2.46: CBL_RENAME_FILE.
* 8.2.47: CBL_SET_CSR_POS.
* 8.2.48: CBL_TOLOWER.
* 8.2.49: CBL_TOUPPER.
* 8.2.50: CBL_WRITE_FILE.
* 8.2.51: CBL_XOR.
* 8.2.52: SYSTEM.
* 8.2.53: X"91".
* 8.2.54: X"E4".
* 8.2.55: X"E5".
* 8.2.56: X"F4".
* 8.2.57: X"F5".
@end menu
@page
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.1 C$CALLEDBY                                                **
@comment *********************************************************************
@newsubsection{8.2.1,C$CALLEDBY}
@diagram{C$CALLEDBY Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$CALLEDBY,SS-C$CALLEDBY,None}@p This routine returns the name of the program that called the currently-executing program.  The program name will be returned, left-justified and space filled, in the specified @term{prog-name-area} argument, which should be a @syntax{PIC X} elementary item or a group item.  If @term{prog-name-area} is too small to receive the entire program name, the program name value will be truncated (on the right) to fit.
@p The @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to one of the following values:
@multitable @columnfractions 0.05 0.95
@item
@item -1 @tab An error occurred.  The @term{prog-name-area} contents will be unchanged.
@item
@item 0 @tab The program calling @syntax{C$CALLEDBY} was not called by any other program (in other words, it is a main program).  The @term{prog-name-area} contents will be set entirely to spaces.
@item
@item 1 @tab The program calling @syntax{C$CALLEDBY} was indeed called by another program, and that program's name has been saved in @term{prog-name-area}.
@end multitable
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.2 C$CHDIR                                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.2,C$CHDIR}
@diagram{C$CHDIR Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$CHDIR,SS-C$CHDIR,None}@p This routine makes @term{directory-path} (an alphanumeric literal or identifier) the current directory.
@p The return code of the operation is returned both in the @term{result} argument (any non-edited numeric identifier) as well as in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.   The return code of the operation will be either 0=Success or 128=failure.
@p The directory change remains in effect until the program terminates (in which the original current directory at the time the program was started will be automatically restored) or until another @syntax{C$CHDIR} or a @subpgmref{CBL_CHANGE_DIR} is executed.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.3 C$COPY                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.3,C$COPY}
@diagram{C$COPY Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$COPY,SS-C$COPY,None}@p Use this subroutine to copy file @term{src-file-path} to @term{dest-file-path} as if it were done via the @syntax{CP} (Unix/OSX) or @syntax{COPY} (Windows) command.
@p Both file path arguments may be alphanumeric literals or identifiers.
@p The third argument is required, but is unused.
@p If the attempt to copy the file fails (for example, it or the destination directory doesn't exist), the @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to 128; on successful completion it will be set to 0.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.4 C$DELETE                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.4,C$DELETE}
@diagram{C$DELETE Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$DELETE,SS-C$DELETE,None}@p This routine deletes the file specified by the @term{file-path} argument (an alphanumeric literal or identifier) just as if that were done using the @syntax{RM} (Unix/OSX) or @syntax{ERASE} (Windows) command.
@p The second argument is required, but is unused.
@p If the attempt to delete the file fails (for example, it doesn't exist), the @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to 128; on successful completion it will be set to 0.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.5 C$FILEINFO                                                **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.5,C$FILEINFO}
@diagram{C$FILEINFO Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$FILEINFO,SS-C$FILEINFO,None}@p With this routine you may retrieve the size of the file specified as the @term{file-path} argument (an alphanumeric literal or identifier) and the date/time that file was last modified.  File size information may not be available in the particular GnuCOBOL build / Operating System combination you are using and may therefore always be returned as zero.  The information is returned to the @term{file-info} argument, which is defined as the following 16-byte area:
@p @example
01  File-Info.
    05 File-Size-In-Bytes  PIC 9(18) COMP.
    05 Mod-YYYYMMDD        PIC 9(8)  COMP. *> Modification Date
    05 Mod-HHMMSS00        PIC 9(8)  COMP. *> Modification Time
@end example
@* The last two decimal digits in the modification time will always be 00.
@p If the subroutine is successful, a value of 0 will be returned in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.  Failure to retrieve the needed statistics on the file will cause a @register{RETURN-CODE} value of 35 to be passed back.  Supplying less than two arguments will generate a 128 @register{RETURN-CODE} value.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.6 C$GETPID}                                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.6,C$GETPID}
@diagram{C$GETPID Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$GETPID,SS-C$GETPID,None}@p Use this subroutine to return the PID (process ID) of the executing GnuCOBOL program.  The PID value is returned into the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@p There are no arguments to this routine.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.7 C$JUSTIFY                                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.7,C$JUSTIFY}
@diagram{C$JUSTIFY Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$JUSTIFY,SS-C$JUSTIFY,None}@p Use C$JUSTIFY to left, right or center-justify an alphabetic, alphanumeric or numeric edited data-item.  The optional justification-type argument indicates the type of the justification to be performed.  The value of that argument will be interpreted as follows:
@itemize @bullet
@p @item If it begins with a capital "C", the value will be centred
@p @item If it begins with a capital "R", the value will be right-justified, space-filled to the left
@p @item If it begins with a capital "L", the value will be left-justified, space-filled to the right
@p @item If it begins with anything else, or is absent, it will be treated as if it is present and begins with a capital "R"
@end itemize
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.8 C$MAKEDIR                                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.8,C$MAKEDIR}
@diagram{C$MAKEDIR Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$MAKEDIR,SS-C$MAKEDIR,None}@p With this routine you may create a new directory --- the name of which is supplied as the @term{dir-path} argument (an alphanumeric literal or identifier).
@p Only the lowest-level directory (last) in the specified path can be created --- all others must already exist.  This subroutine will NOT behave as a @syntax{mkdir -p} (Unix) or @syntax{mkdir /p} (Windows).
@p The @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to the return code of the operation; the value will be either 0=Success or 128=failure.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.9 C$NARG                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.9,C$NARG}
@diagram{C$NARG Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$NARG,SS-C$NARG,None}@p This subroutine returns the number of arguments passed to the program that calls it back to in the numeric field @term{arg-count-result}.  When called from within a user-defined function, a value of one (1) is returned if any arguments were passed to the function or a zero (0) otherwise.
@p When called from a main program, the returned value will always be 0.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.10 C$PARAMSIZE                                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.10,C$PARAMSIZE}
@diagram{C$PARAMSIZE Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$PARAMSIZE,SS-C$PARAMSIZE,None}@p This subroutine returns the size (in bytes) of the subroutine argument supplied using the @term{argument-number} parameter (a numeric literal or data item).
@p The size is returned in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@p If the specified argument does not exist, or an invalid argument number is specified, a value of 0 is returned.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.11 C$PRINTABLE                                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.11,C$PRINTABLE}
@diagram{C$PRINTABLE Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$PRINTABLE,SS-C$PRINTABLE,None}@p The @syntax{C$PRINTABLE} subroutine converts the contents of the data-item specified as the first argument to printable characters.  Those characters that are deemed printable (as defined by the character set used by @term{data-item}) will remain unchanged, while those that are NOT printable will be converted to the character specified as the second argument.
@p If no @term{char} argument is provided, a period (".") will be used.
@p NOTE that CBL_GC_PRINTABLE replaces this although it is currently still supported for legacy reasons.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.12 C$SLEEP                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.12,C$SLEEP}
@diagram{C$SLEEP Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$SLEEP,SS-C$SLEEP,None}@p @syntax{C$SLEEP} puts the program to sleep for the specified number of seconds.  The @term{seconds-to-sleep} argument may be a numeric literal or data item.
@p Sleep times less than 1 will be interpreted as 0, which immediately returns control to the calling program without any sleep delay.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.13 C$TOLOWER                                                **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.13,C$TOLOWER}
@diagram{C$TOLOWER Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$TOLOWER,SS-C$TOLOWER,None}@p This routine will converts the @term{convert-length} (a numeric literal or data item) leading characters of @term{data-item} (an alphanumeric identifier) to lower-case.
@p The @term{convert-length} argument must be specified @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
Any characters in @term{data-item} after the @term{convert-length} point will remain unchanged.
@p If @term{convert-length} is negative or zero, no conversion will be performed.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.14 C$TOUPPER                                                **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.14,C$TOUPPER}
@diagram{C$TOUPPER Built-In Subroutine,SS-C$TOUPPER,SS-C$TOUPPER,None}@p This routine will converts the @term{convert-length} (a numeric literal or data item) leading characters of @term{data-item} (an alphanumeric identifier) to upper-case.
@p The @term{convert-length} argument must be specified @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
Any characters in @term{data-item} after the @term{convert-length} point will remain unchanged.
@p If @term{convert-length} is negative or zero, no conversion will be performed.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.15 CBL_AND                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.15,CBL_AND}
@diagram{CBL_AND Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_AND,SS-CBL_AND,None}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.7
@item @t{@ Old @ @ @ Old @ @ @ New} @* @t{Arg 1@ @ Arg 2@ @ Arg 2} @* @t{@ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit} @* @t{=====@ @ =====@ @ =====} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1}  @tab This subroutine performs a bit-by-bit logical AND operation between the left-most 8*@term{byte-length} corresponding bits of @term{item-1} and @term{item-2}, storing the resulting bit string into @term{item-2}.  The truth table shown to the left documents the AND process.
 @* @* The @term{item-1} argument may be an alphanumeric literal or a data item and @term{item-2} must be a data item.  The length of both @term{item-1} and @term{item-2} must be at least 8*@term{byte-length}.
@end multitable
@p The @term{byte-length} argument may be a numeric literal or data item, and must be specified using @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
@p Any bits in @term{item-2} after the 8*@term{byte-length} point will be unaffected.
@p A result of zero will be passed back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.16 CBL_CHANGE_DIR                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.16,CBL_CHANGE_DIR}
@diagram{CBL_CHANGE_DIR Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_CHANGE_DIR,SS-CBL_CHANGE_DIR,None}@p This routine makes @term{directory-path} (an alphanumeric literal or identifier) the current directory.
@p The return code of the operation, which will be either 0=Success or 128=failure, is returned in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}. @p The directory change remains in effect until the program terminates (in which the original current directory at the time the program was started will be automatically restored) or until another @syntax{CBL_CHANGE_DIR} or a @subpgmref{C$CHDIR} is executed.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.17 CBL_CHECK_FILE_EXIST                                     **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.17,CBL_CHECK_FILE_EXIST}
@diagram{CBL_CHECK_FILE_EXIST Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_CHK_FILE_EX,SS-CBL_CHK_FILE_EX,None}@p With this routine you may retrieve the size of the file specified as the @term{file-path} argument (an alphanumeric literal or identifier) and the date/time that file was last modified.  File size information may not be available in the particular GnuCOBOL build / Operating System combination you are using and may therefore always be returned as zero.
@p The information is returned to the @term{file-info} argument, which is defined as the following 16-byte area:
@p @example
01  file-info.
    05 File-Size-In-Bytes  PIC 9(18)  COMP.
    05 Mod-DD              PIC 9(2)   COMP.  *> Modification Date
    05 Mod-MO              PIC 9(2)   COMP.
    05 Mod-YYYY            PIC 9(4)   COMP.
    05 Mod-HH              PIC 9(2)   COMP.  *> Modification Time
    05 Mod-MM              PIC 9(2)   COMP.
    05 Mod-SS              PIC 9(2)   COMP.
    05 FILLER              PIC 9(2)   COMP.  *> Always 00
@end example
@* If the subroutine is successful, a value of 0 will be returned in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.  Failure to retrieve the needed statistics on the file will cause a @register{RETURN-CODE} value of 35 to be passed back.  Supplying less than two arguments will generate a 128 @register{RETURN-CODE} value.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.18 CBL_CLOSE_FILE                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.18,CBL_CLOSE_FILE}
@diagram{CBL_CLOSE_FILE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_CLOSE_FILE,SS-CBL_CLOSE_FILE,None}@p The @syntax{CBL_CLOSE_FILE} subroutine closes a byte stream file previously opened by either the @subpgmref{CBL_OPEN_FILE} or @subpgmref{CBL_CREATE_FILE} subroutines.
@p If the file defined by the @term{file-handle} argument (a @syntax{PIC X(4) USAGE COMP-X} data item) was opened for output, an implicit @subpgmref{CBL_FLUSH_FILE} will be performed before the file is closed.
@p If the subroutine is successful, a value of 0 will be returned in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.  Failure will cause a @register{RETURN-CODE} value of -1 to be passed back.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.19 CBL_COPY_FILE                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.19,CBL_COPY_FILE}
@diagram{CBL_COPY_FILE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_COPY_FILE,SS-CBL_COPY_FILE,None}@p Use this subroutine to copy file @term{src-file-path} to @term{dest-file-path} as if it were done via the @syntax{CP} (Unix/OSX) or @syntax{COPY} (Windows) command.
@p Both arguments may be alphanumeric literals or identifiers.
@p If the attempt to copy the file fails (for example, it or the destination directory doesn't exist), the @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to 128; on successful completion it will be set to 0.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.20 CBL_CREATE_DIR                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.20,CBL_CREATE_DIR}
@diagram{CBL_CREATE_DIR Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_CREATE_DIR,SS-CBL_CREATE_DIR,None}@p With this routine you may create a new directory --- the name of which is supplied as the @term{dir-path} argument (an alphanumeric literal or identifier).
@p Only the lowest-level directory (last) in the specified path can be created --- all others must already exist.  This subroutine will NOT behave as a @syntax{mkdir -p} (Unix) or @syntax{mkdir /p} (Windows).
@p The @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to the return code of the operation; the value will be either 0=Success or 128=failure.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.21 CBL_CREATE_FILE                                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.21,CBL_CREATE_FILE}
@diagram{CBL_CREATE_FILE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_CREATE_FILE,SS-CBL_CREATE_FILE,None}@p The @syntax{CBL_CREATE_FILE} subroutine creates the new file specified using the file-path argument and opens it for output as a byte-stream file usable by @subpgmref{CBL_WRITE_FILE}.
@p Arguments 2, 3 and 4 should be coded as the constant values shown.  @syntax{CBL_CREATE_FILE} is actually a special-case of the @subpgmref{CBL_OPEN_FILE} routine --- see that routine for a description of the meanings of arguments 2, 3 and 4.
@p A @term{file-handle} (@syntax{PIC X(4) USAGE COMP-X)} will be returned, for use on any subsequent @subpgmref{CBL_WRITE_FILE} or @subpgmref{CBL_CLOSE_FILE} calls.
@p The success or failure of the subroutine will be reported back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}, with a value of -1 indicating an invalid argument and a value of 0 indicating success.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.22 CBL_DELETE_DIR                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.22,CBL_DELETE_DIR}
@diagram{CBL_DELETE_DIR Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_DELETE_DIR,SS-CBL_DELETE_DIR,None}@p This subroutine deletes an empty directory.
@p The only argument --- @term{dir-path} (an alphanumeric literal or identifier) --- is the name of the directory to be deleted.
@p Only the lowest-level directory (last) in the specified path will be deleted, and that directory must be empty to be deleted.
@p The @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to the return code of the operation; the value will be either 0=Success or 128=failure.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.23 CBL_DELETE_FILE                                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.23,CBL_DELETE_FILE}
@diagram{CBL_DELETE_FILE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_DELETE_FILE,SS-CBL_DELETE_FILE,None}@p This routine deletes the file specified by the @term{file-path} argument (an alphanumeric literal or identifier) just as if that were done using the @syntax{RM} (Unix/OSX) or @syntax{ERASE} (Windows) command.
@p If the attempt to delete the file fails (for example, it doesn't exist), the @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to 128; on successful completion it will be set to 0.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.24 CBL_EQ                                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.24,CBL_EQ}
@diagram{CBL_EQ Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_EQ,SS-CBL_EQ,None}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.7
@item @t{@ Old @ @ @ Old @ @ @ New} @* @t{Arg 1@ @ Arg 2@ @ Arg 2} @* @t{@ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit} @* @t{=====@ @ =====@ @ =====} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1}  @tab This subroutine performs a bit-by-bit comparison between the left-most 8*@term{byte-length} corresponding bits of @term{item-1} and @term{item-2}, storing the resulting bit string into @term{item-2}.  The truth table shown to the left documents the EQ process.
 @* @* The @term{item-1} argument may be an alphanumeric literal or a data item and @term{item-2} must be a data item.  The length of both @term{item-1} and @term{item-2} must be at least 8*@term{byte-length}.
@end multitable
@* The @term{byte-length} argument may be a numeric literal or data item, and must be specified using @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
@p Any bits in @term{item-2} after the 8*@term{byte-length} point will be unaffected.
@p A result of zero will be passed back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.25 CBL_ERROR_PROC                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.25,CBL_ERROR_PROC}
@diagram{CBL_ERROR_PROC Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_ERROR_PROC,SS-CBL_ERROR_PROC,None}@p This routine registers a general error-handling routine.
@p The @term{function} argument must be a numeric literal or a 32-bit binary data item (@syntax{USAGE BINARY-LONG}, for example) with a value of 0 or 1.  A value of 0 means that you will be registering ("installing") an error procedure while a value of 1 indicates you're de-registering ("uninstalling") a previously-installed error procedure.
@p The @term{program-pointer} must be a data item with a @syntaxref{USAGE} of @syntax{PROGRAM-POINTER} containing the address of your error procedure.  This item should be given a value using the @statementref{SET Program-Pointer}.  If the error procedure is written in GnuCOBOL, it must be a subroutine, not a user-defined function.
@p A success (0) or failure (non-0) result will be passed back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@p A custom error procedure will trigger when a runtime error condition is encountered.  An error procedure may be registered by a main program or a subprogram, but regardless of from where it was registered, it applies to the overall program compilation group  and will trigger when a runtime error occurs anywhere in the executable program.  If the error procedure was defined by a subprogram, that program must be loaded at the time the error procedure is executed.
@p An error procedure may be used to take whatever actions might be warranted to display additional information or to gracefully close down work in progress, but it cannot @i{prevent} the termination of program execution; should the error procedure not issue its own @syntax{STOP RUN}, control will return back to the standard error routine when the error procedure exits.
@p The code within the handler will be executed and --- once the handler issues a @syntax{return}, if it was written in C, or an @statementrefalt{EXIT PROGRAM,EXIT} or @statement{GOBACK}, if it was written in GnuCOBOL, the system-standard error handling routine will be executed.
@p Only one user-defined error procedure may be in effect at any time.
@p The following is a sample GnuCOBOL program that registers an error procedure.  The output of that program is shown as well.  As as you can see, the error handler's messages appear followed by the standard GnuCOBOL message.
@p @example
1.     IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
2.     PROGRAM-ID. DemoERRPROC.
3.     ENVIRONMENT DIVISION.
4.     DATA DIVISION.
5.     WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
6.     01  Err-Proc-Address            USAGE PROGRAM-POINTER.
7.     PROCEDURE DIVISION.
8.     S1.
9.         DISPLAY 'Program is starting'
10.        SET Err-Proc-Address TO ENTRY 'ErrProc'
11.        CALL 'CBL_ERROR_PROC' USING 0, Err-Proc-Address
12.        CALL 'Tilt' *> THIS DOESN'T EXIST!!!!
13.        DISPLAY 'Program is stopping'
14.        STOP RUN
15.        .
16.    END PROGRAM DemoERRPROC.
17.
18.    IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
19.    PROGRAM-ID. ErrProc.
20.    PROCEDURE DIVISION.
21.    000-Main.
22.        DISPLAY 'Error: ' FUNCTION EXCEPTION-LOCATION
23.        DISPLAY '       ' FUNCTION EXCEPTION-STATEMENT
24.        DISPLAY '       ' FUNCTION EXCEPTION-FILE
25.        DISPLAY '       ' FUNCTION EXCEPTION-STATUS
26.        DISPLAY '*** Returning to Standard Error Routine ***'
27.        EXIT PROGRAM
28.        .
29.    END PROGRAM ErrProc.
@end example
@* When executed, this sample program generates the following console output.
@p @example
E:\Programs\Demos>demoerrproc
Program is starting
Error: DemoERRPROC; S1; 12
       CALL
       00
       EC-PROGRAM-NOT-FOUND
*** Returning to Standard Error Routine ***
DEMOERRPROC.cbl: 27: libcob: Cannot find module 'Tilt'

E:\Programs\Demos>

@end example
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.26 CBL_EXIT_PROC                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.26,CBL_EXIT_PROC}
@diagram{CBL_EXIT_PROC Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_EXIT_PROC,SS-CBL_EXIT_PROC,None}@p This routine registers a general exit-handling routine.
@p The @term{function} argument must be a numeric literal or a 32-bit binary data item (@syntax{USAGE BINARY-LONG}, for example) with a value of 0 or 1.  A value of 0 means that you will be registering ("installing") an exit procedure while a value of 1 indicates you're deregistering ("uninstalling") a previously-installed exit procedure.
@p The @term{program-pointer} must be a data item with a @syntaxref{USAGE} of @syntax{PROGRAM-POINTER} containing the address of your exit procedure.
@p A success (0) or failure (non-0) result will be passed back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@p An exit procedure, once registered, will trigger whenever a @statementrefalt{STOP RUN,STOP} or a @statementref{GOBACK} is executed anywhere in the program.  The exit procedure may execute whatever code is desired to undertake an orderly shut down of the program.  Once the exit procedure terminates by executing an @statementrefalt{EXIT PROGRAM,EXIT} or a @statement{GOBACK}, the system-standard program termination routine will be executed.
@p Only one user-defined exit procedure may be in effect at any time.
@p The following is a sample GnuCOBOL program that registers an exit procedure.  The output of that program is shown as well.
@p @example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
PROGRAM-ID. demoexitproc.
DATA DIVISION.
WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
01  Exit-Proc-Address           USAGE PROGRAM-POINTER.
PROCEDURE DIVISION.
000-Register-Exit-Proc.
    SET Exit-Proc-Address TO ENTRY "ExitProc"
    CALL "CBL_EXIT_PROC" USING 0, Exit-Proc-Address
    IF RETURN-CODE NOT = 0
        DISPLAY 'Error: Could not register Exit Procedure'
    END-IF
    .
099-Now-Test-Exit-Proc.
    DISPLAY
        'Executing a STOP RUN...'
    END-DISPLAY
    GOBACK.
END PROGRAM demoexitproc.

IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
PROGRAM-ID. ExitProc.
DATA DIVISION.
WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
01  Display-Date                PIC XXXX/XX/XX.
01  Display-Time                PIC XX/XX/XX.
01  Now                         PIC X(8).
01  Today                       PIC X(8).
PROCEDURE DIVISION.
000-Main.
    DISPLAY '*** STOP RUN has been executed ***'
    ACCEPT Today FROM DATE YYYYMMDD
    ACCEPT Now   FROM TIME
    MOVE Today TO Display-Date
    MOVE Now   TO Display-Time
    INSPECT Display-Time REPLACING ALL '/' BY ':'
    DISPLAY '***    ' Display-Date '  ' Display-Time '    ***'
    GOBACK.
END PROGRAM ExitProc.

@end example
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.27 CBL_FLUSH_FILE                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.27,CBL_FLUSH_FILE}
@diagram{CBL_FLUSH_FILE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_FLUSH_FILE,SS-CBL_FLUSH_FILE,None}@p In Micro Focus COBOL, calling this subroutine flushes any as-yet unwritten memory buffers for the (output) file whose file-handle is specified as the argument to disk.
@p This routine is non-functional in GnuCOBOL.  It exists only to provide compatibility for applications that may have been developed for Micro Focus COBOL.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.28 CBL_GC_FORK                                             **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.28,CBL_GC_FORK}
@diagram{CBL_GC_FORK Built-In Subroute,SS-CBL_GC_FORK,SS-CBL_GC_FORK,None}
@p CBL_GC_FORK allows you to fork the current COBOL process to a new one.
@p The current content of the process storage (including LOCAL-STORAGE) will be identical, any file handles get invalid in the new process, positions and file and record locks are only available to the original process.
@p This system routine is not available on Windows (exception: GCC on Cygwin).
@p Parameters: none Returns: PID (the child process gets 0 returned, the calling process gets the PID of the created children).
@p Negative values are returned for system dependant error codes and -1 if the function is not available on the current system.
@p @example

CBL_GC_FORK allows you to fork the current COBOL process to a new one. The
current content of the process storage (including LOCAL-STORAGE) will be
identical, any file handles get invalid in the new process, positions and
file / record locks are only available to the original process.
This system routine is not available on Windows (exception: GCC on Cygwin).
Parameters: none Returns: PID (the child process gets 0 returned, the calling
process gets the PID of the created children). Negative values are returned for
system dependant error codes and -1 if the function is not available on the
current system.

 IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
 PROGRAM-ID. prog.
 DATA DIVISION.
 WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
 01  CHILD-PID      PIC S9(9) BINARY.
 01  WAIT-STS       PIC S9(9) BINARY.
 PROCEDURE DIVISION.
     CALL     "CBL_GC_FORK" RETURNING CHILD-PID END-CALL
     EVALUATE TRUE
              WHEN CHILD-PID = ZERO
                   PERFORM CHILD-CODE
              WHEN CHILD-PID > ZERO
                   PERFORM PARENT-CODE
              WHEN CHILD-PID = -1
                   DISPLAY CBL_GC_FORK is not available on the current'
                   ' system!
                   PERFORM CHILD-CODE
                   MOVE 0 TO CHILD-PID
                   PERFORM PARENT-CODE
              WHEN OTHER
                   MULTIPLY CHILD-PID BY -1 END-MULTIPLY
                   DISPLAY CBL_GC_FORK returned system error:  CHILD-PID
     END-EVALUATE
     STOP     RUN.
 CHILD-CODE.
     CALL     "C$SLEEP" USING 1 END-CALL
     DISPLAY  "Hello, I am the child"
     MOVE     2 TO RETURN-CODE
 PARENT-CODE.
     DISPLAY  "Hello, I am the parent"
     CALL     "CBL_GC_WAITPID" USING CHILD-PID RETURNING WAIT-STS
     MOVE     0 TO RETURN-CODE
     EVALUATE TRUE
              WHEN WAIT-STS >= 0
                   DISPLAY Child ended with status:  WAIT-STS
              WHEN WAIT-STS = -1
                   DISPLAY CBL_GC_WAITPID is not available on the '
                   'current system!
              WHEN WAIT-STS < -1
                   MULTIPLY -1 BY WAIT-STS END-MULTIPLY
                   DISPLAY CBL_GC_WAITPID returned system error:  WAIT-STS
     END-EVALUATE

@end example
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.29 CBL_GC_GETOPT                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.29,CBL_GC_GETOPT}
@diagram{CBL_GC_GETOPT Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_GC_GETOPT,SS-CBL_GC_GETOPT,None}
@p CBL_GC_GETOPT realises the quite well-known option parser, getopt, for GnuCOBOL.
@p The usage of this system routine is described by the following example.
@p @example

 IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
 PROGRAM-ID. PROG.
 DATA DIVISION.
 WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
 78  SHORTOPTIONS VALUE "jkl".
 01  LONGOPTIONS.
     05 OPTIONRECORD OCCURS 2 TIMES.
        10  OPTIONNAME   PIC X(25).
        10  HAS-VALUE    PIC 9.
        10  VALPOINT     POINTER VALUE NULL.
        10  RETURN-VALUE PIC X(4).
 01  LONGIND             PIC 99.
 01  LONG-ONLY           PIC 9 VALUE 1.
 01  RETURN-CHAR         PIC X(4).
 01  OPT-VAL             PIC X(10).
 01  COUNTER             PIC 9 VALUE 0.

We first need to define the necessary fields for getopts shortoptions (so),
longoptions (lo), longoption index (longind), long-only-option (long-only)
and also the fields for return values return-char and opt-val (arbitrary
size with trimming, see return codes).
The shortoptions are written down as an alphanumeric field (i.e., a string
with arbitrary size) as follows:
"ab:c::d"

This means we want getopt to look for shortoptions named a, b, c or d and
we demand an option value for b and we are accepting an optional one for c.
The longoptions are defined as a table of records with oname, has-value,
 valpoint and val.

oname defines the name of a longoption.
 has-value defines if an option value is demanded (has-val = 1), optional
 (has-val = 2) or not required (has-val = 0).
valpoint is a pointer used to specify an address to save getopts return
 value to. The pointer is optional. If it is NULL, getopt returns a value
 as usual. If you use the pointer it has to point to a PIC X(4) field.
The field val is a PIC X(4) character which is returned if the longoption
 was recognized.

The longoption structure is immutable! You can only vary the number of
records.
Now we have the tools to run CBL_GC_GETOPT within the procedure division.

PROCEDURE DIVISION.
     MOVE     "version" to OPTIONNAME (1).
     MOVE     0 TO HAS-VALUE (1).
     MOVE     "V" TO RETURN-VALUE (1).
     MOVE     "verbose" TO OPTIONNAME (2).
     MOVE     0 TO HAS-VALUE (2).
     MOVE     "V" TO RETURN-VALUE (2).
     PERFORM  WITH TEST AFTER UNTIL RETURN-CODE = -1
              CALL CBL_GC_GETOPT USING
                  BY REFERENCE SHORTOPTIONS LONGOPTIONS LONGIND
                  BY VALUE LONG-ONLY
                  BY REFERENCE RETURN-CHAR OPT-VAL
              END-CALL
              DISPLAY RETURN-CHAR END-DISPLAY
              DISPLAY OPT-VAL END-DISPLAY
     END-PERFORM
     STOP RUN.

The example shows how we initialize all parameters and call the routine until
CBL_GC_GETOPT runs out of options and returns -1.
The return-char might contain the following:
regular character if an option was recognized
  ? if we have an undefined or ambiguous option
 1  if we have a non-option (only if first byte of so is -)
 0  if valpoint != NULL and we are writing the return value to the specified
      address
 -1 if we dont have any more options (or reach the first non-option if first
      byte of so is +)

The return-codes of CBL_GC_GETOPT are:
 1 if weve got a non-option (only if first byte of so is -)
 0 if valpoint != NULL and we are writing the return value to the specified
   address
-1 if we dont have any more options (or reach the first non-option if first
   byte of so is +)
 2 if we have got an truncated option value in opt-val (because opt-val was
   too small)
 3 if we got a regular answer from getopt

@end example
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.30 CBL_GC_HOSTED                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.30,CBL_GC_HOSTED}
@diagram{CBL_GC_HOSTED Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_GC_HOSTED,SS-CBL_GC_HOSTED,None}
@p @example
CBL_GC_HOSTED provides access to the following C hosted variables:
 argc to binary-long by value
 argv to pointer to char **
 stdin, stdout, stderr to pointer
 errno giving address of errno in pointer to binary-long, use based for more
   direct access and conditional access to the following variables:
tzname pointer to pointer to array of two char pointers
timezone C long, will be seconds west of UTC
daylight C int, will be 1 during daylight savings

System will need to HAVE TIMEZONE defined for these to return anything
meaningful.
Attempts made when they are not available WILL return 1 from CBL GC HOSTED.

It returns 0 when match, 1 on failure, case matters as does length, "arg"
wont match.
The usage of this system routine is described by the following example.

 IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
 PROGRAM-ID. HOSTED.
 DATA DIVISION.
 WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
 01  Argc        BINARY-LONG.
 01  Argv        POINTER.
 01  Stdin       POINTER.
 01  Stdout      POINTER.
 01  Stderr      POINTER.
 01  Errno       POINTER.
 01  Err         BINARY-LONG BASED.
 01  Domain      FLOAT-LONG VALUE 3.0.
 01  Tzname      POINTER.
 01  Tznames     POINTER BASED.
     05  Tzs     POINTER OCCURS 2.
 01  Timezone    BINARY-LONG.
 01  Daylight    BINARY-SHORT.
*>
 PROCEDURE DIVISION.
     call     "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using stdin "stdin"
     display  "stdin : " stdin
     call     "feof" using by value stdin
     display  "feof stdin : " return-code
     call     "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using stdout "stdout"
     display  "stdout : " stdout
     call     "fprintf" using by value stdout by content "Hello" & x"0a"
     call     "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using stderr "stderr"
     display  "stderr : " stderr
     call     "fprintf" using by value stderr by content "on err" & x"0a"
     call     "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using argc "argc"
     display  "argc : " argc
     call     "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using argv "argv"
     display  "argv : " argv
     call     "args" using by value argc argv
     call     "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using errno "errno"
     display  "&errno : " errno
     set      address of err to errno
     display  "errno : " err
     call     "acos" using by value domain
     display  "errno after acos(3.0): " err ", EDOM is 33"
     call     "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using argc "arg"
     display  "arg lookup : " return-code
     call     "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using null "argc"
     display  "null with argc : " return-code
     display  "argc is still : " argc
*> the following only returns zero if the system has HAVE_TIMEZONE set
     call     "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using daylight "daylight "
     display  "timezone lookup : " return-code
     if       return-code not = 0
              display "system doesnt has timezone"
     else
              display "timezone is : " timezone
              call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using daylight "daylight "
              display "daylight lookup : " return-code
              display "daylight is : " daylight
              set environment "TZ" to "PST8PDT"
              call static "tzset" returning omitted on exception
                        continue end-call
              call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using tzname "tzname"
              display "tzname lookup : " return-code
*> tzs(1) will point to z"PST" and tzs(2) to z"PDT"
              if   return-code equal 0 and tzname not equal null then
                   set address of tznames to tzname
                   if   tzs(1) not equal null then
                        display "tzs #1 : " tzs(1)
                   end-if
                   if   tzs(2) not equal null then
                        display "tzs #2 : " tzs(2)
                   end-if
              end-if
     end-if
     goback.
 end program hosted.

@end example
@p Note that the legacy name of this routine that starts with CBL_OC is deprecated, as is NANOSLEEP but will still work. It is recommended that all library routines names starting with CBL_OC are replaced with CBL_GC to minimise issues.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.31 CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP                                        **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.31,CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP}
@diagram{CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP,SS-CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP,None}@p This subroutine puts the program to sleep for the specified number of nanoseconds.
@p The effective granularity of @term{nanoseconds-to-sleep} values will depend upon the granularity of the system clock your computer is using and the timing granularity of the operating system that computer is running.
@p For example, You will not expect to see any difference whatsoever between values of 1, 100, 500 or 1000, but you should see a difference between values such as 250000000 and 500000000.
@p The @term{nanoseconds-to-sleep} argument is a numeric literal or data item.
@p There are one BILLION nanoseconds in a second, so if you wanted to put the program to sleep for 1/4 second you'd use a @term{nanoseconds-to-sleep} value of 250000000.
@p Note that the legacy name of this routine starts with CBL_OC is deprecated, as is HOSTED but will still work. It is recommended that all library routines names starting with CBL_OC are replaced with CBL_GC to minimise issues.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.32 CBL_GC_PRINTABLE                                        **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.32,CBL_GC_PRINTABLE}
@diagram{CBL_GC_PRINTABLE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_GC_PRINTABLE,SS-CBL_GC_PRINTABLE,None}
@p The @syntax{CBL_GC_PRINTABLE} subroutine converts the contents of the data-item specified as the first argument to printable characters.
@p Those characters that are deemed printable (as defined by the character set used by @term{data-item}) will remain unchanged, while those that are NOT printable will be converted to the character specified as the second argument.
@p If no @term{char} argument is provided, a period (".") will be used.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.33 CBL_GC_WAITPID                                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.33,CBL_GC_WAITPID}
@diagram{CBL_GC_WAITPID Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_GC_WAITPID,SS-CBL_GC_WAITPID,None}
@p @example
CBL_GC_WAITPID allows you to wait until another system process ended.
Additional you can check the process return code.
Parameters: none Returns: function-status / child-status Negative values
are returned for system dependant error codes and -1 if the function is not
available on the current system.

     CALL     "CBL_GC_WAITPID" USING CHILD-PID RETURNING WAIT-STS
     MOVE     0 TO RETURN-CODE
     DISPLAY  CBL_GC_WAITPID ended with status:  WAIT-STS

@end example
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.34 CBL_GET_CSR_POS                                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.34,CBL_GET_CSR_POS}
@diagram{CBL_GET_CSR_POS Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_GET_CSR_POS,SS-CBL_GET_CSR_POS,None}@p This subroutine will retrieve the current cursor location on the screen, returning a 2-byte value into the supplied @term{cursor-locn-buffer}.  The first byte of @term{cursor-locn-buffer} will receive the current line (row) location while the second receives the current column location.
@p The returned location data will be in binary form, and will be based upon starting values of 0, meaning that if the cursor is located at line 15, column 12 at the time this routine is called, a value of (14,11) will be returned.
@p The following is a typical @term{cursor-locn-buffer} definition:
@p @example
01  CURSOR-LOCN-BUFFER.
    05 CURSOR-LINE          USAGE BINARY-CHAR.
    05 CURSOR-COLUMN        USAGE BINARY-CHAR.
@end example
@* Values of 1 (Line) and 1 (column) will be returned if GnuCOBOL was not generated to include screen I/O.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.35 CBL_GET_CURRENT_DIR                                      **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.35,CBL_GET_CURRENT_DIR}
@diagram{CBL_GET_CURRENT_DIR Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_GET_CURR_DIR,SS-CBL_GET_CURR_DIR,None}@p This retrieves the fully-qualified pathname of the current directory, saving up to @term{length} characters of that name into the specified @term{buffer}.
@p The first argument is unused, but must be specified.  It must be specified @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
@p The @term{length} argument must be specified @syntax{BY VALUE}.
The @term{buffer} argument must be specified @syntax{BY REFERENCE}.
@p The value specified for the @term{length} argument (a numeric literal or data item) should not exceed the actual length of the @term{buffer} argument.
@p If the value specified for the @term{length} argument is LESS THAN the actual length of the @term{buffer} argument, the current directory path will be left-justified and space filled within the first @term{length} bytes of @term{buffer} --- any bytes in @term{buffer} after that point will be unchanged.
@p If the routine is successful, a value of 0 will be returned to the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.  If the routine failed because of a problem with an argument (such as a negative or 0 length), a value of 128 will result.  Finally, if the 1st argument value is anything but zero, the routine will fail with a 129 value.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.36 CBL_GET_SCR_SIZE                                         **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.36,CBL_GET_SCR_SIZE}
@diagram{CBL_GET_SCR_SIZE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_GET_SCR_SIZE,SS-CBL_GET_SCR_SIZE,None}@p Use this subroutine to retrieve the current console screen size.
@p When the system is running in a windowed environment, this will be the sizing of the console window in which the program is executing.  When the system is not running a windowing environment, the physical console screen attributes will be returned.  In environments such as a Windows console window, where the logical size of the window may far exceed that of the physical console window, the size returned will be that of the physical console window.  Two one-byte values will be returned --- the first will be the current number of lines (rows) while the second will be the number of columns.
@p The returned size data will be in binary form.
@p The following are typical @term{no-of-lines} and @term{no-of-columns} definitions:
@p @example
01  NO-OF-LINES             USAGE BINARY-CHAR.
01  NO-OF-COLUMNS           USAGE BINARY-CHAR.
@end example
@* GnuCOBOL run-time screen management must have been initialized prior to CALLing this routine in order to receive meaningful values.  This means that a @statementref{DISPLAY screen-data-item} or a @statementref{ACCEPT screen-data-item} must have been executed prior to executing the @statement{CALL}.
@p Zero values will be returned if the screen has not been initialized and values of 24 (lines) and 80 (columns) will be returned if GnuCOBOL was not generated to include screen I/O.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.37 CBL_IMP                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.37,CBL_IMP}
@diagram{CBL_IMP Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_IMP,SS-CBL_IMP,None}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.7
@item @t{@ Old @ @ @ Old @ @ @ New} @* @t{Arg 1@ @ Arg 2@ @ Arg 2} @* @t{@ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit} @* @t{=====@ @ =====@ @ =====} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1}  @tab This subroutine performs a bit-by-bit logical "implies" process between the left-most 8*@term{byte-length} corresponding bits of @term{item-1} and @term{item-2}, storing the resulting bit string into @term{item-2}.  The truth table shown to the left documents the IMP process.
 @* @* The @term{item-1} argument may be an alphanumeric literal or a data item and @term{item-2} must be a data item.  The length of both @term{item-1} and @term{item-2} must be at least 8*@term{byte-length}.
@end multitable
@* The @term{byte-length} argument may be a numeric literal or data item, and must be specified using @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
@p Any bits in @term{item-2} after the 8*@term{byte-length} point will be unaffected.
@p A result of zero will be passed back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.38 CBL_NIMP                                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.38,CBL_NIMP}
@diagram{CBL_NIMP Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_NIMP,SS-CBL_NIMP,None}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.7
@item @t{@ Old @ @ @ Old @ @ @ New} @* @t{Arg 1@ @ Arg 2@ @ Arg 2} @* @t{@ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit} @* @t{=====@ @ =====@ @ =====} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0}  @tab This subroutine performs the negation of a bit-by-bit logical "implies" process between the left-most 8*@term{byte-length} corresponding bits of @term{item-1} and @term{item-2}, storing the resulting bit string into @term{item-2}.  The truth table shown to the left documents the NIMP process.
 @* @* The @term{item-1} argument may be an alphanumeric literal or a data item and @term{item-2} must be a data item.  The length of both @term{item-1} and @term{item-2} must be at least 8*@term{byte-length}.
@end multitable
@* The @term{byte-length} argument may be a numeric literal or data item, and must be specified using @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
@p Any bits in @term{item-2} after the 8*@term{byte-length} point will be unaffected.
@p A result of zero will be passed back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.39 CBL_NOR                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.39,CBL_NOR}
@diagram{CBL_NOR Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_NOR,SS-CBL_NOR,None}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.7
@item @t{@ Old @ @ @ Old @ @ @ New} @* @t{Arg 1@ @ Arg 2@ @ Arg 2} @* @t{@ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit} @* @t{=====@ @ =====@ @ =====} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0}  @tab This subroutine performs the negation of a bit-by-bit logical "or" process between the left-most 8*@term{byte-length} corresponding bits of @term{item-1} and @term{item-2}, storing the resulting bit string into @term{item-2}.  The truth table shown to the left documents the NOR process.
 @* @* The @term{item-1} argument may be an alphanumeric literal or a data item and @term{item-2} must be a data item.  The length of both @term{item-1} and @term{item-2} must be at least 8*@term{byte-length}.
@end multitable
@* The @term{byte-length} argument may be a numeric literal or data item, and must be specified using @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
@p Any bits in @term{item-2} after the 8*@term{byte-length} point will be unaffected.
@p A result of zero will be passed back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.40 CBL_NOT                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.40,CBL_NOT}
@diagram{CBL_NOT Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_NOT,SS-CBL_NOT,None}@p This subroutine "flips" the left-most 8*@term{byte-length} bits of @term{item-1}, changing 0 bits to 1s and 1s to 0s.  The changes are made directly im @term{item-1}.
@p The @term{item-1} argument must be a data item.  The length of @term{item-1} must be at least 8*@term{byte-length}.
@p The @term{byte-length} argument may be a numeric literal or data item, and must be passed using @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
@p Any bits in @term{item-1} after the 8*@term{byte-length} point will be unaffected.
@p A result of zero will be passed back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.42 CBL_OPEN_FILE                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.42,CBL_OPEN_FILE}
@diagram{CBL_OPEN_FILE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_OPEN_FILE,SS-CBL_OPEN_FILE,None}@p This routine opens an existing file for use as a byte-stream file usable by CBL_WRITE_FILE or CBL_READ_FILE.
@p The @term{file-path} argument  is an alphanumeric literal or data-item.
@p The @term{access-mode} argument is a numeric literal or data item with a PIC X USAGE COMP-X (or USAGE BINARY-CHAR) definition; it specifies how you wish to use the file, as follows:
@p @display
1 = input (read-only)
2 = output (write-only)
3 = input and/or output
@end display
@* The third and fourth arguments would specify a locking mode and device specification, respectively, but they're not implemented in GnuCOBOL (currently, at least) --- just specify each as 0.
@p The final argument (@term{handle}) is a @syntax{PIC X(4) USAGE COMP-X} item that will receive the handle to the file.  That handle is used on all other byte-stream functions to reference this specific file.
@p A @registerref{RETURN-CODE} value of -1 indicates an invalid argument, while a value of 0 indicates success.  A value of 35 means the file does not exist.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.43 CBL_OR                                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.43,CBL_OR}
@diagram{CBL_OR Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_OR,SS-CBL_OR,None}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.7
@item @t{@ Old @ @ @ Old @ @ @ New} @* @t{Arg 1@ @ Arg 2@ @ Arg 2} @* @t{@ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit} @* @t{=====@ @ =====@ @ =====} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1}  @tab This subroutine performs a bit-by-bit logical "or" process between the left-most 8*@term{byte-length} corresponding bits of @term{item-1} and @term{item-2}, storing the resulting bit string into @term{item-2}.  The truth table shown to the left documents the OR process.
 @* @* The @term{item-1} argument may be an alphanumeric literal or a data item and @term{item-2} must be a data item.  The length of both @term{item-1} and @term{item-2} must be at least 8*@term{byte-length}.
@end multitable
@* The @term{byte-length} argument may be a numeric literal or data item, and must be specified using @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
@p Any bits in @term{item-2} after the 8*@term{byte-length} point will be unaffected.
@p A result of zero will be passed back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.44 CBL_READ_FILE                                            **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.44,CBL_READ_FILE}
@diagram{CBL_READ_FILE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_READ_FILE,SS-CBL_READ_FILE,None}@p This routine reads @term{nbytes} of data starting at byte number @term{offset} from the byte-stream file defined by @term{handle} into the specified @term{buffer}.
@p The @term{handle} argument (@syntax{PIC X(4) USAGE COMP-X}) must have been populated by a prior call to @subpgmref{CBL_OPEN_FILE}.
@p The @term{offset} argument (@syntax{PIC X(8) USAGE COMP-X}) defines the location in the file of the first byte to be read.  The first byte of a file is byte offset 0.
@p The @term{nbytes} argument (@syntax{PIC X(4) USAGE COMP-X}) specifies how many bytes (maximum) will be read.
If the @term{flag} argument is specified as 128, the size of the file (in bytes) will be returned into the file offset argument (argument 2) upon completion.  Not all operating system/GnuCOBOL environments may be able to retrieve file sizes  in such cases, a value of zero will be returned.  The only other valid value for flags is 0.  This argument may be specified either as a numeric literal or as a @syntax{PIC X USAGE COMP-X} data item.
@p Upon completion, the @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to 0 if the read was successful or to 10 if an "end-of-file" condition occurred.  If a value of -1 is returned, a problem was identified with the subroutine arguments.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.45 CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR                                        **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.45,CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR}
@diagram{CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR Build-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR,SS-CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR,None}@p Waits until a character is typed from the terminal and then read it with no echo.
@p Parameters: char             PIC X.        Receives the character that was typed, in ASCII.
@p             status-code      PIC XX COMP-5.
@p If RETURNING is not used the RETURN-CODE special register receives the status-code where zero is success and non-zero it is not.
@p [ Above information taken from MF WB manual ].
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.46 CBL_RENAME_FILE                                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.46,CBL_RENAME_FILE}
@diagram{CBL_RENAME_FILE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_RENAME_FILE,SS-CBL_RENAME_FILE,None}@p You may use this subroutine to rename a file.
@p The file specified by @term{old-file-path} will be "renamed" to the name specified as @term{new-file-path}.  Each argument may be an alphanumeric literal or data item.
@p Despite what the name of this routine might make you believe, this routine is more than just a simple "rename" --- it will actually move the file supplied as the 1st argument to the file specified as the 2nd argument.  Think of it as a two-step sequence, first copying the @term{old-file-path} file to the @term{new-file-path} file and then a second step where the @term{old-file-path} is deleted.
@p If the attempt to move the file fails (for example, it doesn't exist), the @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to 128; on successful completion it will be set to 0.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.47 CBL_SET_CSR_POS                                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.47,CBL_SET_CSR_POS}
@diagram{CBL_SET_CSR_POS Build-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_SET_CSR_POS,SS-CBL_SET_CSR_POS,None}@p Set current position on terminal.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.48 CBL_TOLOWER                                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.48,CBL_TOLOWER}
@diagram{CBL_TOLOWER Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_TOLOWER,SS-CBL_TOLOWER,None}@p This routine will convert the first @term{convert-length} (a numeric literal or data item) characters of @term{data-item} (an alpha-numeric identifier) to lower-case.
@p The @term{convert-length} argument must be specified @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.  It specifies how many (leading) characters in data-item will be converted --- any characters after that will remain unchanged.
@p If @term{convert-length} is negative or zero, no conversion will be performed.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.49 CBL_TOUPPER                                              **
@comment *********************************************************************
@newsubsection{8.2.49,CBL_TOUPPER}
@diagram{CBL_TOUPPER Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_TOUPPER,SS-CBL_TOUPPER,None}@p This routine will convert the first @term{convert-length} (a numeric literal or data item) characters of @term{data-item} (an alpha-numeric identifier) to upper-case.
@p The @term{convert-length} argument must be specified @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.  It specifies how many (leading) characters in data-item will be converted --- any characters after that will remain unchanged.
@p If @term{convert-length} is negative or zero, no conversion will be performed.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.50 CBL_WRITE_FILE                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.50,CBL_WRITE_FILE}
@diagram{CBL_WRITE_FILE Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_WRITE_FILE,SS-CBL_WRITE_FILE,None}@p This routine writes @term{nbytes} of data from the specified @term{buffer} to the byte-stream file defined by @term{handle} starting at byte number @term{offset} within the file.
@p The @term{handle} argument (@syntax{PIC X(4) USAGE COMP-X}) must have been populated by a prior call to CBL_OPEN_FILE.
The offset argument (@syntax{PIC X(4) USAGE COMP-X}) defines the location in the file of the first byte to be written to.  The first byte of a file is byte offset 0.
@p The @term{nbytes} argument (@syntax{PIC X(4) USAGE COMP-X}) specifies how many bytes (maximum) will be written.
@p Currently, the only allowable value for the flags argument is 0.  This argument may be specified either as a numeric literal or as a @syntax{PIC X(1) USAGE COMP-X} data item.
@p Upon completion, the @registerref{RETURN-CODE} will be set to 0 if the write was successful or to 30 if an I/O error condition occurred.  If a value of -1 is returned, a problem was identified with the subroutine arguments.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.51 CBL_XOR                                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.51,CBL_XOR}
@diagram{CBL_XOR Built-In Subroutine,SS-CBL_XOR,SS-CBL_XOR,None}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.7
@item @t{@ Old @ @ @ Old @ @ @ New} @* @t{Arg 1@ @ Arg 2@ @ Arg 2} @* @t{@ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit@ @ @ @ Bit} @* @t{=====@ @ =====@ @ =====} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 0} @* @t{@ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0@ @ @ @ @ @ 1} @* @t{@ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 1@ @ @ @ @ @ 0}  @tab This subroutine performs a bit-by-bit logical "exclusive or" process between the left-most 8*@term{byte-length} corresponding bits of @term{item-1} and @term{item-2}, storing the resulting bit string into @term{item-2}.  The truth table shown to the left documents the XOR process. @* @* The @term{item-1} argument may be an alphanumeric literal or a data item and @term{item-2} must be a data item.  The length of both @term{item-1} and @term{item-2} must be at least 8*@term{byte-length}.
@end multitable
@* The @term{byte-length} argument may be a numeric literal or data item, and must be specified using @syntaxrefalt{BY VALUE,CALL}.
@p Any bits in @term{item-2} after the 8*@term{byte-length} point will be unaffected.
@p A result of zero will be passed back in the @registerref{RETURN-CODE}.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.52 SYSTEM                                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.52,SYSTEM}
@diagram{SYSTEM Built-In Subroutine,SS-SYSTEM,SS-SYSTEM,None}@p This subroutine submits the specified @term{command} (an alphanumeric literal or data item) to a command shell for execution as if it were typed into a console/terminal window.
@p A shell will be opened subordinate to the GnuCOBOL program issuing the call to @syntax{SYSTEM}.
@p Output from the command (if any) will appear in the command window in which the GnuCOBOL program was executed.
@p On a Unix system, the shell environment will be established using the default shell program.  This is also true when using a GnuCOBOL build created with and for OSX or the Cygwin Unix emulator.
@p With native Windows Windows/MinGW builds, the shell environment will be the Windows console window command processor (usually "cmd.exe") appropriate for the version of Windows you're using.
@p To trap output from the executed command and process it within the GnuCOBOL program, use a redirection (>) to send the command output to a temporary file which you read from within the program once control returns.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.53 X"91"                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.53,X"91"}
@diagram{X"91" Built-In Subroutine,SS-X91,SS-X91,None}@p The original Micro Focus version of this routine is capable of providing a wide variety of functions.  GnuCOBOL supports just three of them:
@itemize @bullet
@p @item Turning runtime switches (SWITCH-1, @dots{} , SWITCH-8) on.
@p @item Turning runtime switches (SWITCH-1, @dots{} , SWITCH-8) off.
@p @item Retrieving the number of arguments passed to a subroutine.
@end itemize
@* The @term{return-code} argument must be a one-byte binary numeric data item (@syntax{USAGE BINARY-CHAR} is recommended).  It will receive a value of 0 if the operation was successful, 1 otherwise.
@p The @term{function-code} argument must be either a numeric literal or a one-byte binary numeric data item (@syntax{USAGE BINARY-CHAR} is recommended).
@p The third argument --- @term{variable-arg} --- is defined differently depending upon the @term{function-code} value, as follows:
@table @asis
@p @item 11
@p Sets and/or clears all eight of the COBOL switches (SWITCH-1 through SWITCH-8).  @xref{SPECIAL-NAMES}, for an explanation of those switches.
@p The @term{variable-arg} argument should be an @syntax{OCCURS 8 TIMES} table of @syntax{USAGE BINARY-CHAR}.
@p Each occurrence that is set to a value of zero prior to the @syntax{CALL X"91"} will cause the corresponding switch to be cleared.  Each occurrence set to 1 prior to the @syntax{CALL X"91"} will cause the corresponding switch to be set.
@p Values other than 0 or 1 will be ignored.
@p @item 12
@p Reads all eight of the COBOL switches (SWITCH-1 through SWITCH-8)
@p The @term{variable-arg} argument should be an @syntax{OCCURS 8 TIMES} table of @syntax{USAGE BINARY-CHAR}.
@p Each of the 1st eight occurrences of the array will be set to either 0 or 1 --- 1 if the corresponding switch is set, 0 otherwise.
@p @item 16
@p Retrieves the number of arguments passed to the program executing the CALL X"91", saving that number into the @term{variable-arg} argument.  That should be a binary numeric data item (@syntax{USAGE BINARY-CHAR} is recommended).
@end table
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.54 X"E4"                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.54,X"E4"}
@diagram{X"E4" Built-In Subroutine,SS-XE4,SS-XE4,None}@p Use X"E4" to clear the screen.  There are no arguments and no returned value.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.55 X"E5"                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@newsubsection{8.2.55,X"E5"}
@diagram{X"E5" Built-In Subroutine,SS-XE5,SS-XE5,None}@p The X"E5" routine will sound the PC "bell".  There are no arguments and no returned value.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.56 X"F4"                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.56,X"F4"}
@diagram{X"F4" Built-In Subroutine,SS-XF4,SS-XF4,None}@p This routine packs the low-order (rightmost) bit from each of the eight 1-byte items in @term{table} into the corresponding bit positions of the single-byte data item @term{byte}.
@p The @term{byte} data item need be only a single byte in size.  If it is longer, the excess will be unaffected by this subroutine.
@p The @term{table} data item must be at least 8 bytes long.  If it is longer, the excess will be ignored by this subroutine.
@p Typically, table is defined similarly to the following:
@p @example
01  Table-Arg.
    05 Each-Byte OCCURS 8 TIMES USAGE BINARY-CHAR.
@end example
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 8.2.57 X"F5"                                                    **
@comment *********************************************************************
@page
@newsubsection{8.2.57,X"F5"}
@diagram{X"F5" Built-In Subroutine,SS-XF5,SS-XF5,None}@p This routine unpacks each bit of the single-byte data item @term{byte} into the low-order (rightmost) bit of each of the corresponding eight 1-byte items in @term{table}.  The other seven bit positions of each of the first eight entries in @term{table} will be set to zero.
@p The @term{byte} data item need be only a single byte in size.  If it is longer, the excess will be unaffected by this subroutine.
@p The @term{table} data item must be at least 8 bytes long.  If it is longer, the excess will be ignored by this subroutine.
@p Typically, table is defined similarly to the following:
@p @example
01  Table-Arg.
    05 Each-Byte OCCURS 8 TIMES USAGE BINARY-CHAR.
@end example
@iftex
@sp 3
@center ------------------------------------------------------------
@center End of Chapter 8 --- FUNCTIONS
@end iftex


