@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** D. Summary of Document Changes                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@newappendix{D,Summary of Document Changes}GnuCOBOL is an ever-evolving tool.  While all reasonable attempts will be made to maintain the currency of the information in this document, neither the author of this document nor the authors of the GnuCOBOL software extend any warranties of any kind for this document or for the information contained therein.
@p 1st Edition - 23 JAN 2010
@enumerate
@p @item INITIAL RELEASE OF DOCUMENT -- corresponds to OpenCOBOL 1.1, 06FEB2009 version.
@end enumerate
@p 1st Edition (Rev 1) - 1 APR 2010
@enumerate
@p @item Elaborated on the use of the GLOBAL clause in data item definitions.
@end enumerate
@p 1st Edition (Rev 2) - 17 SEP 2010
@enumerate
@p @item Corrected "section 0" broken hyperlinks in the document.
@p @item Introduced documentation for the hitherto undocumented "COBCPY" environment variable.
@end enumerate
@p 2nd Edition - 17 JUL 2012.
@enumerate
@p @item Updated for version 23NOV2013 of GnuCOBOL 2.0.
@p @item Corrected a problem with several bogus footnote references.
@p @item Added an International A4 page layout format version of the document, in addition to the US Letter page format version.
@p @item The use of a slash character ("/") in column 7 was documented - this feature has existed since at least the 06FEB2009 version of OpenCOBOL 1.1, but was undocumented.
@p @item Added documentation on the DEBUG-ITEM special register.
@p @item Updated DECLARATIVES documentation to better explain how to use it.
@p @item A new section was added to the documentation to discuss the ramifications, rules and capabilities of sub-programming.
@p @item Documentation was added on the COB_SET_DEBUG environment variable.
@p @item The listings of all sample programs are now presented as listings generated by the GnuCOBOL Interactive Compiler utility (itself included as a sample program).  This not only shows full source listings of the sample programs but complete cross-reference listings as well.
@p @item A new sample program -- DAY-FROM-DATE -- was introduced to illustrate how to write a user-defined function.
@p @item A reference to a new figure documenting error codes was added to the EXCEPTION-STATUS function.
@p @item Documentation was added to the CLOSE statement to explicitly document how the last record written to a LINE SEQUENTIAL or LINE ADVANCING file may have a terminating delimiter sequence written at the time the file is closed.
@p @item Documentation was added to the WRITE statement to explicitly document how the ADVANCING options are handled with LINE SEQUENTIAL and the new LINE ADVANCING files.
@p @item Additional documentation on the cobcrun command was added.
@p @item User-defined functions are now supported.
@p @item A new built-in subroutine -- C$PRINTABLE -- was introduced (the COBDUMP sample program now uses it.
@p @item LINE ADVANCING files are now supported.
@p @item Floating-point literals of the form [+-]nn.nnE[+-]nn are now supported.
@p @item Z"xxxxx" null-delimited alphanumeric literals are now supported.
@p @item The COPY statement now supports the COBOL2002 standard LEADING and TRAILING options as well as the "IN/OF library-name" and SUPPRESS PRINTING options.
@p @item The REPLACE Compiler-Directing Facility (CDF) statement was introduced.
@p @item Conditional code generation is now supported through the use of >>DEFINE, >>IF, >>SET, >>SOURCE and >>TURN Compiler-Directing Facility (CDF) directives.
@p @item The COB_LINE_TRACE environment variable was renamed to COB_SET_TRACE.
@p @item The COB_DISPLAY_WARNINGS environment variable was introduced.
@p @item SOURCE-COMPUTER WITH DEBUGGING MODE is now supported.
@p @item The CHARACTER CLASSIFICATION clause of the OBJECT-COMPUTER clause is now supported.
@p @item Mnemonic names are now optional for SWITCH declarations in SPECIAL-NAMES; Eight new switches (SWITCH-0, SWITCH-9 through SWITCH-15) are now available; Switches may be specified as SW0 through SW15 as well as SWITCH-0 through SWITCH-15; a new print channel designation of CSP is now available; SYMBOLIC CHARACTERS are now supported.
@p @item The device name DISC may now be used interchangeably with DISK in SELECT statements.
@p @item Files may now be SELECTed with the "NOT OPTIONAL" designation in addition to "OPTIONAL".
@p @item New USAGE's of BINARY-INT, BINARY-LONG-LONG and COMPUTATIONAL-6 were introduced.
@p @item The LEFTLINE screen attribute was added to the SCREEN SECTION.
@p @item New  intrinsic functions were introduced:
@itemize @bullet
@p @item MODULE-CALLER-ID
@p @item MODULE-DATE
@p @item MODULE-FORMATTED-DATE
@p @item MODULE-ID
@p @item MODULE-PATH
@p @item MODULE-SOURCE
@p @item MODULE-TIME
@end itemize
@item A new option --- WITH KEPT LOCK --- was added to the READ verb.
@p @item The following changes were made to the ACCEPT Statement:
@itemize @bullet
@p @item The TIMEOUT option was added to Format 4.
@p @item The non-functional CONVERSION option was added to Format 4.
@p @item The LINE NUMBER option (a synonym for LINES) and COLS option (a synonym for COLUMNS) and ESCAPE KEY options were added to Format 6.
@p @item A new format -- Format 7 -- was introduced.
@end itemize
@item The ALTER verb is now supported [Editorial Comment: this change was made only because NIST tests need it and not because you should be using it!]
@p @item Options (mnemonic-name, STDCALL and STATIC) were added to the CALL verb.
@p @item The non-functional CONVERSION option was added to Format 4 of the DISPLAY statement.
@p @item The REVERSED option for the OPEN statement is now supported syntactically, even though it is non-functional.
@p @item The READY TRACE and RESET TRACE statements were introduced.
@p @item A new option -- STATUS -- was added to the STOP verb.
@p @item The following built-in named subroutines were added:
@itemize @bullet
@p @item C$CALLEDBY
@p @item C$GETPID
@p @item CBL_GET_CSR_POS
@p @item CBL_GET_SCR_SIZE
@end itemize
@item The following built-in numbered subroutines were added:
@itemize @bullet
@p @item X"E4"
@p @item X"E5"
@end itemize
@end enumerate
@p 3rd Edition - 09 APR 2014.
@enumerate
@p @item The document has been converted to GNU Texinfo format, from which both GNU "info" and PDF files may be created for distribution.
@p @item A new document --- "Sample Programs" --- has been created from the former "Sample Programs" chapter of this document.
@p @item A new document --- "Quick Reference" --- has been introduced to provide a complete summary of all syntax diagrams.
@end enumerate
@p 3rd Edition - 01 MAY 2014.
@enumerate
@p @item Updated to include RWCS documentation, added with GnuCOBOL 2.1.
@p @item Removed the "See Also" links from all sections; with the Index now being fully hyperlinked, the maintenance of these links as well as the document size increase imposed by them is no longer justified.
@end enumerate
@p 4th Edition - Late 2014, Not issued for public use.
@p 5th Edition - Changes July 2017 through Sept 2017 for v2.2 Final.
@enumerate
@p @item All documents have been updated to use GnuCOBOL instead of GNU COBOL including this update list.
@p @item All documents dated to June 2017 for use with the general release of v2.2.
@p @item References as to the availability of reportwriter inserted.
@p @item Amended count of reserved word from 700 to >900.
@p @item Changed record locking status from 47 to 51. Bug #272.
@p @item Added in 4.1.4.3 extra switch settings 16-26, A through Z. Bug #302.
@p @item Updated Appendix B Reserved Work list. from cobc --(lists- intrinsics, mnemonics, system, reserved).
@p @item All sections passed through spell checker.
@p @item Updated cobcrun & cobc --help output. Mods to section 1 & copyright info.
@p @item 22/07 Added details for ACCEPT OMITTED as 6.17.1.8 including links.
@p @item 24/04 Reformat order of changes so latest is last in this list instead of push down.
@p @item 24/07 Added missing ID elements - ID, program-id options.
@p @item 25/07 Added missing elements for Screen section data, OMITTED in ACCEPT console & screen, EXCEPTION-STATUS.
@p @item 25/07 Catch up on bug closures - Bugs Now cleared and closed are - 272, 302, 396-398, 401.
@p @item 27/07 More info added for PROTECT SIZE taken from MF docs.
@p @item 18/08 Fix comments for bug #97.
@p @item 07/09 Issued docs for GnuCOBOL Compiler v2.2 Final.
@end enumerate
@p 5th Edition, Update 1 - Sept 2017.
@enumerate
@p @item 09/09 Fix and cleared, Bug #422.
@p @item 09/09 Change around SPECIAL-NAMES and REPOSITORY as wrong order, Bug #424.
@p @item 10/09 Added system library elements CBL_GC_ FORK, GETOPT*, HOSTED*, NANOSLEEP*, PRINTABLE (Replaces legacy C$PRINTABLE) AND WAITPID (Replaces legacy C$WAITPID). Note legacy names still supported at least for now but may well be removed so suggest replace names likewise replace CBL_OC_xxx* with CBL_GC_xxx).
@p @item 11/09 Added new note in chap. 1 - Introduction regarding non avail of RWCS and ref to 1.3.13.
@p @item       Renamed usage of CBL_OC to CBL_GC for CBL_GC library routines within CBL_GC sections.
@p @item       Added new entries as 8.1.3 and moved up following 8.1 entries. Likewise for main menu.
@p @item       Added new for 8.2.3 showing runtime.cfg and updated with current default.conf at same.
@p @item       Adjust 4.1.3 & 4.1.4 as not set up in index of 1 & 4 in right order.
@p @item       Checked and changed menus for incorrect or missing numbering.
@p @item 14/10 Bug #447 fixed (CDF Replacing trailing == missing.
@p @item 20/10 Bug #450 Removed example one and refs to COMP-5, added note for the three usage types trunc applies to and amended the performance test example with extra resulting figures.
@p @item 01/11 Added Appendix E for changes since 2009 thanks to Edward Hart (see his grammar document).
@p @item 07/11 Provided more needed info for -P compiler option.
@p @item 25/11 Updated heads for 2.3 / Dec2017 & CP to 2018.
@p @item 28/11 In 1.1 added reference to the GnuCOBOL FAQ.
@p @item 10/12 Updated heads for 3.0 rc1 24DEC2017, changed remarks for RW in
@p @item       chapters 1.3.13 and 7. showing availability for v3.0.
@p @item       -> 6th Ed. to be issued in Jan 18 for v3.0 final.
@end enumerate

@p 6th Edition on release of v3.0 rc.
@enumerate
@p @item 2017.
@p @item 17/12  Update description for NUMVAL-C along with missing 2nd & 3rd arguments and more detail.
@p @item        Added missing third parameter execution-time to functions DATE-TO-YYYYMMDD, DAY-TO-YYYYDDD, YEAR-TO-YYYY.
@p @item        Added missing functions: FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE, FORMATTED-DATE, FORMATTED-DATETIME, FORMATTED-TIME, INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE, TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME and renumbered all functions accordingly by position in Guide.
@p @item 18/12  More notes for NUMVAL, NUMVAL-C.
@p @item        NUMVAL-C contains two references for testing descriptions.
@p @item        Removed the 'syntax ref for FINAL CONTROL FOOTINGS at 7.2.
@p @item        Removed incorrect information about a fatal error when opening or other processing of a file as all errors can be recovered with a Cobol program using file status test or using a Declarative section.
@p @item 19/12  Moved current updates section in D and top of manual into a included text file.
@p @item 20/12  Added comment regard REPORT section clauses and their order.
@p @item 21/12  Run Spellcheck against manual sources to catch typo's.
@p @item        Added warning about using WS area only for data referenced within RW.
@p @item        Removed warning in RW notes about CODE IS and COLUMNS are ignored - not any more.
@p @item 23/12  Moved chap. 7 - 10 to 9 - 12, 3 - 6 to 4 - 7. Created new ch.2 from 1.3 & new ch.8 from 7.16 to ch. 8. Moved 8.21 to special registers?. Removed report about specific non-implemented functions in 8.1 that now are.  Inserted page breaks in 8.2. Moved Ch. 7.6 - 7.13 to at end of Ch. 2. NEEDS resorting.
@p @item 24/12  Added support for SPLIT and SPARSE keys in ISAM (Indexed) type files see references for RECORD and ALTERNATE KEY clauses. Update ChangeLog.
@p @item        Create index for 'Split Keys' reference.
@p @item 25/12  Remove comment from RW chapter about availability as now included.
@p @item 27/12  Added missing SET LAST EXCEPTION to PG and QR.
@p @item        Added un-implemented functions: BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER, CHAR-NATIONAL, DISPLAY-OF, EXCEPTION-FILE-N, EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N, INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN, NATIONAL-OF, STANDARD-COMPARE with warning not implemented.
@p @item        Added missing system functions CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR & CBL_SET_CSR_POS. Spotted in NEWS file.
@p @item 29/12  Adjusted format for select idx to reduce width of text.
@p @item 2018.
@p @item 01/01  Update all 3 for 01 Jan 2018.
@p @item 05/01  Updated contents of runtime.cfg in Chp. 10.
@p @item 13/01  Updated comments for CBL_CHECK_FILE_EXIST as back to front/wrong.
@p @item 14/02  For SORT replaced diagram reference of file-name-3 to file-name-2 as wrong.
@p @item 19/02  Updated references for RWCS in Chap. 1 to point correctly to 2.1.13. Included comment about the NEWS file for up to the minute changes to language features. Included auto version refs in ch. 1 & 2 but some may well still be missing.
@p @item 15/03  Updated references for CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR but with content from MF WB but better than nothing.
@p @item 26/03  Updated Perform varying in 7.8.29.3 to show that omitting sub-clause BY will be treated as if 'BY 1' was specified. Changed 11.8.3 text.
@p @item 27/03  Changed >>SET CONSTANT to remove refs to 'AS' changes to 11.8.3 removed dups.
@p @item 01/04  Fixes for #Bug 508, 505.
@p @item 09/04  Changed version/build to intermediate date and version as I give up guessing when.
@p @item 19/04  Changed details regard internal compiler variable COB_MAX_FIELD_PARAMS used in call.c from common.c in sections 7.8.5 and 11.6.1.1 also change reference of 11.5.1 in section 11.6 to be 11.6.1.
@p @item 08/05  Updated version and date for current compiler also changed references for 20XX standard to 2014 with other minor comments in section 1. Changed 2.1.13 to specify that RWCS is available as at v3.0 and removed link info at SF as redundant with release of v3.0.
@p @item 22/05  Changes to: 8.1.58 reload program output for v3.0 but not showing any difference, 8.2.28 Clean up description swapping '/' with 'and'.
@p @item 26/05  Added missing screen io status codes in 7.8.1.4.13. - Bug #524.
@p @item 30/05  Changed case of COBOL to Cobol in regard to the language in section 2 to ease reading and added comment re: compiler name by case. Added notes regarding reserved word count and list in 2.1.2 and Appendix B. Spelling error (missing 's') in 2.1.2. Bug #525.
@p @item 31/05  Changed case of ' Cobol ' to ' COBOL ' throught out document but most seems to be in chaps. 1 & 2.
@p @item 12/07  8.1.63 NUMVAL & 8.1.64 (& B), NUMVAL-C each has one #CR too many - Spotted by Eugenio. Bug #536. 7.8.43 Repos Ident.-3 down a line - yep also spotted by Eugenio, Bug #530 QR also fixed.
@p @item 16/07  8.1.64 & B missed one more CR. See 12/07.
@p @item 17/07  Removed references in sect. 1 regarding RWCS - no longer applies. #540.
@p @item 28/08  Typo in ch. 2 resr = rest.
@p @item 13/10  Typo at 7.8.30.1.
@p @item 12/11  Updated Changelog to Updates content and commit call changes as forgot to do so.
@p @item 06/12  Updated version and date, (c) to 2019 in case I forget next month.
@p @item 2019.
@p @item 08/01  In chapter 2.1 updated processes to add, remove reserved words and how the dialect used is defined by usage of cobc steering of -std and -conf.
@p @item        Stopped indicating a date of final release for v3.0 - given up.
@p @item        Minor update in 2.0 regarding different manuals available. Added extra text to 7.8.3 ALLOCATE.
@p @item 02/03  In 7.8.39.2 SET, the first para removed as option is available. Added extra info regarding CALL for PROGRAM-POINTER both as a element of the CALL and as RETURNING.
@p @item        Added comment in 1.0 for the FAQ as a must read document.
@end enumerate

@include updates.texi
@iftex
@sp 3
@center ------------------------------------------------------------
@center End of Appendix D --- Summary of Document Changes
@end iftex
