@comment %**start of header
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** DOCUMENT HEADER                                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS WHEN RUNNING "MAKEINFO":                   **
@comment ** --------------------------------------------------------------- **
@comment ** Use the command "makeinfo --no-split gnucobpg.texi" to build    **
@comment ** an INFO file from this source.                                  **
@comment **                                                                 **
@comment ** Unfortunately, every version of MAKEINFO the author has tried   **
@comment ** produces a corrupted TAG TABLE at the end of the INFO file,     **
@comment ** making it impossible to gain access to nodes past the first     **
@comment ** several chapters.  If, however, you manually edit the generated **
@comment ** INFO file and DELETE the entire TAG TABLE from the end of the   **
@comment ** file (including the "Tag Table" and "End Tag Table" lines) the  **
@comment ** INFO file will be fine.  It will take a little longer for an    **
@comment ** INFO reader to locate a node (a millisecond or two) but the     **
@comment ** extra time will be unnoticeable.                                **
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS WHEN RUNNING "TEXI2PDF":                   **
@comment ** --------------------------------------------------------------- **
@comment ** Use the command "texi2pdf -q -c gnucobpg-xx.texi" to build a    **
@comment ** PDF (xx="a4" or "letter")                                       **
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment
@comment Now includes doc changes for CURRENT Edition as in Chap. D.
@comment
@setfilename gnucobpg.info
@set CHAPNAME Contents
@finalout
@include Macros.texi
@paragraphindent 0
@set BUILD 24Dec2017
@set VERSION 3.0 rc1
@comment %**end of header
@setchapternewpage odd
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** COPYING POLICY STATEMENT                                        **
@comment *********************************************************************
@copying
This manual documents GnuCOBOL @value{VERSION}, @value{BUILD} build.

@verbatim
Document  Copyright 2009-2014 Gary L. Cutler, FSF (Free Software Foundation).
Updates:  Copyright 2014-2018 Vincent B. Coen, Gary L. Cutler & FSF.
@end verbatim
@quotation

The authors and copyright holders of the Cobol programming language itself used herein:


FLOW-MATIC (trademark for Sperry Rand Corporation) Programming for the Univac(R) I & II. Data Automation Systems copyrighted 1958, 1959, by Sperry Rand Corporation; IBM commercial translator form F28-8013, copyrighted 1959 by IBM; FACT DSI27A5260-2760, copyrighted 1960 by Minneapolis-Honeywell,
have specifically authorised the use of this material in whole or in part of the COBOL specifications. Such authorisation extends to the reproduction & use of COBOL specifications in programming manuals or similar publications.

@end quotation
@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License [FDL], Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with Invariant Section ''Introduction'', no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".
@end quotation
@end copying
@dircategory GNU-COBOL
@direntry
* GNU-COBOL: (gnucobpg)        GnuCOBOL Programmer's Guide
@end direntry
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** TITLE PAGE (WHEN GENERATING PDF VIA TeX)                        **
@comment *********************************************************************
@titlepage
@title GnuCOBOL Programmer's Guide
@subtitle For Version @value{VERSION} [@value{BUILD}]
@author Gary L. Cutler (@email{cutlergl@@gmail.com}).
@author For updates Vincent B. Coen (@email{vbcoen@@gmail.com}).
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@page
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** TABLE OF CONTENTS (WHEN GENERATING PDF VIA TeX)                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@headings off
@oddheading GnuCOBOL @value{VERSION} [@value{BUILD}] Programmer's Guide @| @| @thispage
@oddfooting @today{} @| @| @value{CHAPNAME}
@evenheading @thispage @| @| GnuCOBOL @value{VERSION} [@value{BUILD}] Programmer's Guide
@evenfooting @value{CHAPNAME} @| @| @today{}
@contents
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** TOP NODE POINT (Ignore if running TeX)                          **
@comment *********************************************************************
@ifinfo
@node Top
@top GnuCOBOL Programmer's Guide
This manual documents the @value{BUILD} build of GnuCOBOL @value{VERSION}  00June2017 build of GnuCOBOL 2.2.
@menu
List of Chapters and Appendices:

* 1:  Introduction.
* 2:  CDF - Compiler Directing Facility.
* 3:  IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
* 4:  ENVIRONMENT DIVISION.
* 5:  DATA DIVISION.
* 6:  PROCEDURE DIVISION.
* 7:  Report Writer Usage Notes.
* 8:  Interfacing With The OS.
* 9:  Sub-Programming.
* 10: Programming Style Suggestions.
* A:  Appendix A - Glossary of Terms.
* B:  Appendix B - Reserved Word List.
* C:  Appendix C - GNU Free Documentation License.
* D:  Appendix D - Summary of Document Changes.
* E:  Appendix E - Summary of Compiler Changes since 2009 and version v1-1.
* I:  INDEX.

Full Contents:

@detailmenu
* 1:  Introduction.
*   1.1:  Additional Reference Sources.
*   1.2:  Introducing COBOL.
*     1.2.2:  Why YOU Should Learn COBOL.
*     1.2.2:  Programmer Productivity.
*   1.3:  So What is GnuCOBOL?.
*     1.3.1:  Language Reserved Words.
*     1.3.2:  User-Defined Words.
*     1.3.3:  Case Insensitivity.
*     1.3.4:  Readability of Programs.
*     1.3.5:  Divisions Organize Programs.
*     1.3.6:  Copybooks.
*     1.3.7:  Structured Data.
*     1.3.8:  Files.
*     1.3.9:  Table Handling.
*     1.3.10: Sorting and Merging Data.
*     1.3.11: String Manipulation Features.
*     1.3.12: Screen Formatting Features.
*       1.3.12.2: A Sample Screen.
*       1.3.12.2: Color Palette and Video Attributes.
*     1.3.13: Report Writer Features.
*     1.3.14: Data Initialization.
*     1.3.15: Syntax Diagram Conventions.
*     1.3.16: Format of Program Source Lines.
*     1.3.17: Program Structure.
*     1.3.18: Comments.
*     1.3.19: Literals.
*       1.3.19.1: Numeric Literals.
*       1.3.19.2: Alphanumeric Literals.
*       1.3.19.3: Figurative Constants.
*     1.3.20: Punctuation.
*     1.3.21: LENGTH OF.
*     1.3.22: Interfacing to Other Environments.

* 2:  CDF - Compiler Directing Facility.
*   2.1 : >>CALL-CONVENTION.
*   2.2 : COPY.
*   2.3 : REPLACE.
*   2.4 : >>DEFINE.
*   2.5 : >>IF.
*   2.6 : >>SET.
*   2.7 : >>SOURCE.
*   2.8 : >>TURN.
*   2.9 : >>D.
*   2.10: >>DISPLAY.
*   2.11: >>PAGE.
*   2.12: >>LISTING.
*   2.13: >>LEAP-SECONDS.
*   2.14: * Directives.

* 3:  IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.

* 4:  ENVIRONMENT DIVISION.
*   4.1: CONFIGURATION SECTION.
*     4.1.1: SOURCE-COMPUTER.
*     4.1.2: OBJECT-COMPUTER.
*     4.1.3: SPECIAL-NAMES.
*       4.1.3.1: Alphabet-Name-Clause.
*       4.1.3.2: Class-Definition-Clause.
*       4.1.3.3: Switch-Definition-Clause.
*       4.1.3.4: Symbolic-Characters-Clause.
*     4.1.4: REPOSITORY.
*   4.2: INPUT-OUTPUT SECTION.
*     4.2.1: SELECT.
*       4.2.1.1: ORGANIZATION SEQUENTIAL.
*       4.2.1.2: ORGANIZATION LINE SEQUENTIAL.
*       4.2.1.3: ORGANIZATION RELATIVE.
*       4.2.1.4: ORGANIZATION INDEXED.
*     4.2.2: SAME RECORD AREA.
*     4.2.3: MULTIPLE FILE.

* 5:  DATA DIVISION.
*   5.1: Data Definition Principles.
*   5.2: FILE SECTION.
*     5.2.2: File/Sort-Description.
*     5.2.2: FILE-SECTION-Data-Item.
*   5.3: WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
*   5.4: LOCAL-STORAGE SECTION.
*   5.5: LINKAGE SECTION.
*   5.6: REPORT SECTION.
*     5.6.1: Report Group Definitions.
*     5.6.2: REPORT SECTION Data Items.
*   5.7: SCREEN SECTION.
*   5.8: Special Data Items.
*     5.8.1: 01-Level Constants.
*     5.8.2: 66-Level Data Items.
*     5.8.3: 77-Level Data Items.
*     5.8.4: 78-Level Data Items.
*     5.8.5: 88-Level Data Items.
*   5.9: Data Description Clauses.
*     5.9.1:  ANY LENGTH.
*     5.9.2:  AUTO.
*     5.9.3:  AUTO-SKIP.
*     5.9.4:  AUTOTERMINATE.
*     5.9.5:  BACKGROUND-COLOR.
*     5.9.6:  BASED.
*     5.9.7:  BEEP.
*     5.9.8:  BELL.
*     5.9.9:  BLANK.
*     5.9.10: BLANK WHEN ZERO.
*     5.9.11: BLINK.
*     5.9.12: COLUMN.
*     5.9.13: CONSTANT.
*     5.9.14: EMPTY-CHECK.
*     5.9.15: EXTERNAL.
*     5.9.16: ERASE.
*     5.9.17: FALSE.
*     5.9.18: FOREGROUND-COLOR.
*     5.9.19: FROM.
*     5.9.20: FULL.
*     5.9.21: GLOBAL.
*     5.9.22: GROUP INDICATE.
*     5.9.23: HIGHLIGHT.
*     5.9.24: JUSTIFIED.
*     5.9.25: LEFTLINE.
*     5.9.26: LENGTH-CHECK.
*     5.9.27: LINE.
*     5.9.28: LOWLIGHT.
*     5.9.29: NEXT GROUP.
*     5.9.30: NO-ECHO.
*     5.9.31: OCCURS.
*     5.9.32: OVERLINE.
*     5.9.33: PICTURE.
*     5.9.34: PRESENT WHEN.
*     5.9.35: PROMPT.
*     5.9.36: PROTECTED.
*     5.9.37: REDEFINES.
*     5.9.38: RENAMES.
*     5.9.39: REQUIRED.
*     5.9.40: REVERSE-VIDEO.
*     5.9.41: SECURE.
*     5.9.42: SIGN.
*     5.9.43: SOURCE.
*     5.9.44: SUM.
*     5.9.45: SYNCRONIZED.
*     5.9.46: TO.
*     5.9.47: TYPE.
*     5.9.48: UNDERLINE.
*     5.9.49: USAGE.
*     5.9.50: USING.
*     5.9.51: VALUE.

* 6:  PROCEDURE DIVISION.
*   6.1:  PROCEDURE DIVISION USING.
*   6.2:  PROCEDURE DIVISION CHAINING.
*   6.3:  PROCEDURE DIVISION RETURNING.
*   6.4:  PROCEDURE DIVISION Sections and Paragraphs.
*   6.5:  DECLARATIVES.
*   6.6:  Table References.
*   6.7:  Qualification of Data Names.
*   6.8:  Reference Modifiers.
*   6.9:  Arithmetic Expressions.
*   6.10: Conditional Expressions.
*     6.10.1: Condition Names.
*     6.10.2: Class Conditions.
*     6.10.3: Sign Conditions.
*     6.10.4: Switch-Status Conditions.
*     6.10.5: Relation Conditions.
*     6.10.6: Combined Conditions.
*     6.10.7: Negated Conditions.
*   6.11: Use of Periods.
*   6.12: Use of VERB/END-VERB Constructs.
*   6.13: Concurrent Access to Files.
*     6.13.1: File Sharing.
*     6.13.2: Record Locking.
*   6.14: Common Clauses on Executable Statements.
*     6.14.1: AT END + NOT AT END.
*     6.14.2: CORRESPONDING.
*     6.14.3: INVALID KEY + NOT INVALID KEY.
*     6.14.4: ON EXCEPTION + NOT ON EXCEPTION.
*     6.14.5: ON OVERFLOW + NOT ON OVERFLOW.
*     6.14.6: ON SIZE ERROR + NOT ON SIZE ERROR.
*     6.14.7: ROUNDED.
*   6.15: Special Registers.
*   6.16: Intrinsic Functions.
*   6.17: GnuCOBOL Statements.

* 7:  Report Writer Usage Notes.
*   7.1: RWCS Lexicon.
*   7.2: The Anatomy of a Report.
*   7.3: The Anatomy of a Report Page.
*   7.4: How RWCS Builds Report Pages.
*   7.5: Control Hierarchy.
*   7.6: An Example.
*     7.6.1: Data.
*     7.6.2: Program.
*     7.6.3: Generated Report Pages.
*   7.7: Control Hierarchy (Revisited).
*   7.8: Turning PHYSICAL Page Formatting Into LOGICAL Formatting.

* 8:  Interfacing With The OS.
*   8.1: Compiling Programs.
*     8.1.1: cobc - The GnuCOBOL Compiler.
*     8.1.2: Compilation Time Environment Variables.
*     8.1.3: Predefined Compilation Variables.
*     8.1.4: Locating Copybooks.
*     8.1.5: Compiler Configuration Files.
*   8.2: Running Programs.
*     8.2.1: Direct Execution.
*     8.2.2: Executing Dynamically-Loadable Libraries.
*       8.2.2.1: cobcrun - Command-line Execution.
*       8.2.2.2: Dynamically Loaded Subprograms.
*     8.2.3: Run Time Environment Variables.
*     8.2.4: Program Arguments.
*   8.3: Built-In System Subroutines.
*   8.4: Binary Truncation.

* 9:  Sub-Programming.
*   9.1: Subprogram Types.
*   9.2: Independent vs Contained vs Nested Subprograms.
*   9.3: Alternate Entry Points.
*   9.4: Dynamic vs Static Subprograms.
*   9.5: Subprogram Execution Flow.
*     9.5.1: Subroutine Execution Flow.
*     9.5.2: User-Defined Function Execution Flow.
*   9.6: Sharing Data Between Calling and Called Programs.
*     9.6.1: Subprogram Arguments.
*       9.6.1.1: Calling Program Considerations.
*       9.6.1.2: Called Program Considerations.
*     9.6.2: GLOBAL Data Items.
*     9.6.3: EXTERNAL Data Items.
*   9.7: Recursive Subprograms.
*   9.8: Combining GnuCOBOL and C Programs.
*     9.8.1: GnuCOBOL Run-Time Library Requirements.
*     9.8.2: String Allocation Differences Between GnuCOBOL and C.
*     9.8.3: Matching C Data Types with GnuCOBOL USAGE's.
*     9.8.4: GnuCOBOL Main Programs CALLing C Subprograms.
*     9.8.5: C Main Programs Calling GnuCOBOL Subprograms.

* 10: Programming Style Suggestions.
*   10.1: Marking Changes in Programs.
*   10.2: Data Item Coding and Naming Conventions.
*   10.3: Table Subscripting versus Table Indexing.
*   10.4: Copybook Naming Conventions and Usage.
*   10.5: PROCEDURE DIVISION Sections Versus Paragraphs.
*   10.6: COMPUTE Versus ADD-SUBTRACT-MULTIPLY-DIVIDE.

* A:  Appendix A - Glossary of Terms.

* B:  Appendix B - Reserved Word List.

* C:  Appendix C - GNU Free Documentation License.

* D:  Appendix D - Summary of Document Changes.

* E:  Appendix E - Summary of Compiler Changes since 2009 and version v1-1.
@end detailmenu
@end menu
@end ifinfo
@settitle GnuCOBOL Programmer's Guide Guide @value{VERSION} [@value{BUILD}]
@comment
@comment ** Update for all changes as well as in Chap D resets for new Edition.
@comment
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** Summary of Document Changes for this update                     **
@comment *********************************************************************
@iftex
@top Amendment Changes for Programmers Guide
@end iftex
@p 6th Edition On release of v3.0 rc1.
@enumerate
@p @item 17/12 Update description for NUMVAL-C along with missing 2nd & 3rd arguments and more detail.
@p @item       Added missing third parameter execution-time to functions DATE-TO-YYYYMMDD, DAY-TO-YYYYDDD, YEAR-TO-YYYY.
@p @item       Added missing functions: FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE, FORMATTED-DATE, FORMATTED-DATETIME, FORMATTED-TIME, INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE, TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME and renumbered all functions accordingly by position in Guide.
@end enumerate
@comment Above to force TOC on odd page so a blank page on even side.
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** Document Body                                                   **
@comment *********************************************************************
@include 1.texi
@include 2.texi
@include 3.texi
@include 4.texi
@include 5.texi
@include 6.texi
@include 7.texi
@include 8.texi
@include 9.texi
@include 10.texi
@include A.texi
@include B.texi
@include C.texi
@include D.texi
@include E.texi
@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** Index                                                           **
@comment *********************************************************************
@node INDEX
@unnumbered Index
@set CHAPNAME Index
@printindex cp
@bye
