@p 6th Edition On release of v3.0 rc1.
@enumerate
@p @item 17/12  Update description for NUMVAL-C along with missing 2nd & 3rd arguments and more detail.
@p @item        Added missing third parameter execution-time to functions DATE-TO-YYYYMMDD, DAY-TO-YYYYDDD, YEAR-TO-YYYY.
@p @item        Added missing functions: FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE, FORMATTED-DATE, FORMATTED-DATETIME, FORMATTED-TIME, INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE, TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME and renumbered all functions accordingly by position in Guide.
@p @item 18/12  More notes for NUMVAL, NUMVAL-C.
@p @item        NUMVAL-C contains two references for testing descriptions.
@p @item        Removed the 'syntax ref for FINAL CONTROL FOOTINGS at 7.2.
@p @item        Removed incorrect information about a fatal error when opening or other processing of a file as all errors can be recovered with a Cobol program using file status test or using a Declarative section.
@p @item 19/12  Moved current updates section in D and top of manual into a included text file.
@p @item 20/12  Added comment regard REPORT section clauses and their order.
@p @item 21/12  Run Spellcheck against manual sources to catch typo's.
@p @item        Added warning about using WS area only for data referenced within RW.
@p @item        Removed warning in RW notes about CODE IS and COLUMNS are ignored - not any more.
@p @item 23/12  Moved chap. 7 - 10 to 9 - 12, 3 - 6 to 4 - 7. Created new ch.2 from 1.3 & new ch.8 from 7.16 to ch. 8. Moved 8.21 to special registers?. Removed report about specific non-implemented functions in 8.1 that now are.  Inserted page breaks in 8.2. Moved Ch. 7.6 - 7.13 to at end of Ch. 2. NEEDS resorting.
@p @item 24/12  Added support for SPLIT and SPARSE keys in ISAM (Indexed) type files see references for RECORD and ALTERNATE KEY clauses. Update ChangeLog.
@p @item        Create index for 'Split Keys' reference.
@p @item 25/12  Remove comment from RW chapter about availability as now included.
@p @item 27/12  Added missing SET LAST EXCEPTION to PG and QR.
@p @item        Added un-implemented functions: BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER, CHAR-NATIONAL, DISPLAY-OF, EXCEPTION-FILE-N, EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N, INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN, NATIONAL-OF, STANDARD-COMPARE with warning not implemented.
@p @item        Added missing system functions CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR & CBL_SET_CSR_POS. Spotted in NEWS file.
@p @item 29/12  Adjusted format for select idx to reduce width of text.
@p @item 01/01  Update all 3 for 01 Jan 2018.
@p @item 05/01  Updated contents of runtime.cfg in Chp. 10.
@p @item 13/01  Updated comments for CBL_CHECK_FILE_EXIST as back to front/wrong.
@p @item 14/02  For SORT replaced diagram reference of file-name-3 to file-name-2 as wrong.
@p @item 19/02  Updated references for RWCS in Chap. 1 to point correctly to 2.1.13. Included comment about the NEWS file for up to the minute changes to language features. Included auto version refs in ch. 1 & 2 but some may well still be missing.
@p @item 15/03  Updated references for CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR but with content from MF WB but better than nothing.
@p @item 26/03  Updated Perform varying in 7.8.29.3 to show that omitting sub-clause BY will be treated as if 'BY 1' was specified. Changed 11.8.3 text.
@p @item 27/03  Changed >>SET CONSTANT to remove refs to 'AS' changes to 11.8.3 removed dups.
@p @item 01/04  Fixes for #Bug 508, 505.
@p @item 09/04  Changed version/build to intermediate date and version as I give up guessing when.
@p @item 19/04  Changed details regard internal compiler variable COB_MAX_FIELD_PARAMS used in call.c from common.c in sections 7.8.5 and 11.6.1.1 also change reference of 11.5.1 in section 11.6 to be 11.6.1.
@p @item 08/05  Updated version and date for current compiler also changed references for 20XX standard to 2014 with other minor comments in section 1. Changed 2.1.13 to specify that RWCS is available as at v3.0 and removed link info at SF as redundant with release of v3.0.
@p @item 22/05  Changes to: 8.1.58 reload program output for v3.0 but not showing any difference, 8.2.28 Clean up description swapping '/' with 'and'.
@p @item 26/05  Added missing screen io status codes in 7.8.1.4.13. - Bug #524.
@end enumerate
